

===== PAGE 1 =====

Autonomous Unmanned Aerial Vehicle Navigation using
Reinforcement Learning: A Systematic Review
Fadi AlMahamid, Katarina Grolinger∗
Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, Western University, London, Ontario, Canada
ARTICLE INFO
Keywords:
Reinforcement Learning
Autonomous UAV Navigation
UAV
Systematic Review
ABSTRACT
There is an increasing demand for using Unmanned Aerial Vehicle (UAV), known as drones, in
diﬀerentapplicationssuchaspackagesdelivery,traﬃcmonitoring,searchandrescueoperations,and
militarycombatengagements.Inalloftheseapplications,theUAVisusedtonavigatetheenvironment
autonomously - without human interaction, perform speciﬁc tasks and avoid obstacles. Autonomous
UAV navigation is commonly accomplished using Reinforcement Learning (RL), where agents act
as experts in a domain to navigate the environment while avoiding obstacles. Understanding the
navigationenvironmentandalgorithmiclimitationsplaysanessentialroleinchoosingtheappropriate
RL algorithm to solve the navigation problem eﬀectively. Consequently, this study ﬁrst identiﬁes the
main UAV navigation tasks and discusses navigation frameworks and simulation software. Next,
RL algorithms are classiﬁed and discussed based on the environment, algorithm characteristics,
abilities, and applications in diﬀerent UAV navigation problems, which will help the practitioners
and researchers select the appropriate RL algorithms for their UAV navigation use cases. Moreover,
identiﬁed gaps and opportunities will drive UAV navigation research.
Symbol Description
s ∈S States belongs to all possible statesS
a ∈A Actiona belongs to the set of all possible
ActionsA
r ∈R Rewardr belongs to the set of all
generated RewardsR
 Discounted factor decreases the
contribution of the future rewards, where
0<< 1
Gt The Expected Summation of the
Discounted Rewards;Gt = ∑∞
k=0kRt+k+1
P (s¨,r ðs,a ) The probability of the transition to states¨
with rewardr from taking actiona in state
s at timet
 A trajectory consists of a sequence of
actions and states pairs, where the actions
inﬂuence the states, also called an episode.
Each trajectory has a start state and ends
in a ﬁnal state that terminates the
trajectory
Q(s,a ) Action-value function expresses the
expected return of the state-action pairs
(s,a );Qw(s,a ) isQ(s,a ) parameterized by
w
∗Corresponding author.
falmaham@uwo.ca(F. AlMahamid);kgrolinger@uwo.ca (K.
Grolinger)
ORCID(s): 0000-0002-6907-7626 (F. AlMahamid);
0000-0003-0062-8212(K. Grolinger)
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.engappai.2022.105321
The article submitted 5 February 2022 toEngineering Applications
of Artiﬁcial IntelligenceJournal; Received in revised form 12 July 2022;
Accepted 4 August 2022.
0952-1976/© 2022 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.
Symbol Description
V (s) State-value function is similar toQ(s,a )
except it measures how good to be in a
states;V w(s) is a State-value function
parameterized byw
A(s,a ) Advantage-Value functionA(s,a ) measures
how good an action is in comparison to
alternative actions at a given state;
A(s,a ) = Q(s,a ) −V (s)
(aðs) Stochastic Policy is a function that maps
the probability of selecting an actiona
from the states. It describes agent
behavior
(s) Deterministic Policy is similar to
Stochastic Policy, except symbol is
used to distinguish it from Stochastic
Policy
Q(s,a ) Action-value functionQ(s,a ), when
following a policy
V(s) State-value functionV (s), when following
a policy
 State visitation probability
∼ Sampled from. For example,s ∼ meanss
sampled from state visitation probability
() The expected discounted reward following
a policy, similar toGt
1. Introduction
AutonomousSystems(AS)aresystemsthatcanperform
desired tasks without human interference, such as robots
performing tasks without human involvement, self-driving
cars,anddeliverydrones.ASareinvadingdiﬀerentdomains
to make operations more eﬃcient and reduce the cost and
risk incurred from the human factor.
AnUnmannedAerialVehicle(UAV)isanaircraftwith-
out a human pilot, mainly known as a drone. Autonomous
AlMahamid & Grolinger:Preprint submitted to Elsevier Page 1 of 24
arXiv:2208.12328v1  [cs.RO]  25 Aug 2022

===== PAGE 2 =====

Autonomous UAV Navigation using RL: A Systematic Review
UAVs have been receiving an increasing interest due to
their diverse applications, such as delivering packages to
customers, responding to traﬃc collisions to attain injured
with medical needs, tracking military targets, assisting with
search and rescue operations, and many other applications.
Typically, UAVs are equipped with cameras, among
other sensors, that collect information from the surrounding
environment, enabling UAVs to navigate that environment
autonomously. UAV navigation training is typically con-
ductedinavirtual3DenvironmentbecauseUAVshavelim-
itedcomputationresourcesandpowersupply,andreplacing
UAV parts due to crashes can be expensive.
Diﬀerent Reinforcement Learning (RL) algorithms are
usedtotrainUAVstonavigatetheenvironmentautonomously.
RL can solve various problems where the agent acts as a
human expert in the domain. The agent interacts with the
environmentbyprocessingtheenvironment’sstate,respond-
ing with an action, and receiving a reward. UAV cameras
and sensors capture information from the environment for
state representation. The agent processes the captured state
and outputs an action that determines the UAV movement’s
direction or controls the propellers’ thrust, as illustrated in
Figure 1.
The research community provided a review of diﬀerent
UAV navigation problems, such as Visual UAV navigation
[1, 2], UAV Flocking [3] and Path Planning [4]. Neverthe-
less,tothebestoftheauthors’knowledgethereisnosurvey
relatedtoapplicationsofRLinUAVnavigation.Hence,this
paper aims to provide a comprehensive and systematic re-
viewontheapplicationofvariousRLalgorithmstodiﬀerent
autonomous UAV navigation problems. This survey has the
following contributions:
• Help the practitioners and researchers to select the
right algorithm to solve the problem on hand based
on the application area and environment type.
• Explain primary principles and characteristics of var-
ious RL algorithms, identify relationships among
them,andclassifythemaccordingtotheenvironment
type.
Figure 1:UAV training using deep reinforcement agent
• Discuss and classify diﬀerent RL UAV navigation
frameworks according to the problem domain.
• Recognize the various techniques used to solve dif-
ferent UAV autonomous navigation problems and the
diﬀerent simulation tools used to perform UAV navi-
gation tasks.
The remainder of the paper is organized as follows:
Section 2 presents the systematic review process, Section 3
introduces RL, Section 4 provides a comprehensive review
of the application of various RL algorithms and techniques
in autonomous UAV navigation, Section 5 discusses the
UAVNavigationFrameworksandsimulationsoftware,Sec-
tion6classiﬁesRLalgorithmanddiscussesthemostpromi-
nentalgorithms,Section7explainsRLalgorithmsselection
process, and Section 8 identiﬁes challenges and research
opportunities. Finally, Section 9 concludes the paper.
2. Review Process
Thissectiondescribedtheinclusioncriteria,paperiden-
tiﬁcation process, and threats to validity.
2.1. InclusionCriteriaandIdentiﬁcationofPapers
The study’s main objective is to analyze the application
of Reinforcement Learning in UAV navigation and provide
insights into RL algorithms. Therefore, the survey consid-
ered all papers in the past ﬁve years (2016-2021) written
in the English language that include the following terms
combined, alongside with their variations:Reinforcement
Learning, Navigation, andUAV.
In contrast, RL algorithms are listed based on the au-
thors’ domain knowledge of the most prominent algorithms
and by going through the related work of the identiﬁed
algorithms with no restriction to the publication time to
include a large number of algorithms.
Theidentiﬁcationprocessofthepaperswentthroughthe
following stages:
• First stage: The authors identiﬁed all studies that
strictly applied RL to UAV Navigation and acknowl-
edgedthatmodel-freeRListypicallyutilizedtotackle
UAV navigation challenges, except for a single arti-
cle [5] that employs model-based RL. Therefore, the
authors choose to concentrate on model-free RL and
exclude research irrelevant to UAV Navigation, such
as UAV networks and traditional optimization tools
and techniques [6–10].
• Second stage: The authors listed all RL algorithms
based on authors’ knowledge of the most prominent
algorithms, the references of recognized algorithms,
then identiﬁed the corresponding paper of each algo-
rithm.
• Third stage: the authors identiﬁed how RL is used to
solve diﬀerent UAV navigation problems, classiﬁed
the work, and then recognized more related papers
using exiting work references.
IEEE Xplore and Scopus were the primary sources of
papers’ identiﬁcation between 2016 and 2021. The search
querywasappliedusingdiﬀerentterminologiesthatareused
AlMahamid & Grolinger:Preprint submitted to Elsevier Page 2 of 24

===== PAGE 3 =====

Autonomous UAV Navigation using RL: A Systematic Review
to describe the UAV alternatively, such asUNMANNED
AERIALVEHICLE,DRONE,QUADCOPTER,or QUADRO-
TOR,andthesetermsarecross-checkedwith REINFORCE-
MENT LEARNING, andNAVIGATION, which resulted in a
total of 104 papers. After removing 15 duplicate papers and
5 unrelated papers, the count became 84.
The authors identiﬁed another 75 papers that mainly
describetheRLalgorithmsbasedontheauthors’experience
andthereferenceslistoftherecognizedwork,usingGoogle
Scholar as the primary search engine. While RL for UAV
navigation studies were restricted to ﬁve years, all RL al-
gorithms are included as many are still extensively used re-
gardlessoftheirage.ThesearchwascompletedinNovember
2021, with a total of 159 papers after all exclusions.
2.2. Threats to Validity
Despitetheauthors’eﬀorttoincludeallrelevantpapers,
the study might be subject to the following main threats to
the validity:
• Location bias: The search for papers was performed
using two primary digital libraries (databases), IEEE
Xplore and Scopus, which might limit the retrieved
papers based on the published journals, conferences,
and workshops in the database.
• Language bias: Only papers published in English are
included.
• TimeBias:Thesearchqueryisonlylimitedtoretriev-
ing papers between 2016 and 2021, which results in
excluding relevant papers published before 2016.
• Knowledgereportingbias:TheresearchpapersofRL
algorithms are identiﬁed using authors’ knowledge of
variant algorithms and the related work in the recog-
nized algorithms. It is hard to pinpoint all algorithms
utilizingasearchquery,whichcouldresultinmissing
some RL algorithms.
3. Reinforcement Learning
RLcanbeexplainedusingtheMarkovDecisionProcess
(MDP), where a RL agent learns through experience by
taking actions in the environment, causing a change in the
environment’s state, and receiving a reward for the action
taken to measure the success or failure of the action. Equa-
tion1deﬁnesthetransitionprobabilityfromstate sbytaking
the action a to the new state s¨ with a rewardr, for all
s¨ ∈S, s ∈S, r ∈R, a∈A(s)[11].
P (s¨,rðs,a ) = Pr {St =s¨,Rt =rðSt−1 =s,At−1 =a} (1)
The reward R is generated using a reward function,
which can be expressed as a function of the actionR(a),
or as a function of action-state pairsR(a,s ). The reward
helps the agent learn good actions from bad actions, and
as the agent accumulates experience, it starts taking more
successful actions and avoiding bad ones [11].
All actions the agent takes from a start state to a ﬁnal
(terminal) state make anepisode (trajectory). The goal of
MDP is to maximize the expected summation of the dis-
counted rewards by adding all the rewards generated from
an episode. However, sometimes the environment has an
inﬁnite horizon, where the actions cannot be divided into
episodes. Therefore, using a discounted factor (multiplier)
 to the powerk, where ∈ [0, 1]as expressed in Equation
2helpstheagenttoemphasizetherewardatthecurrenttime
stepandreducetherewardvaluegrantedatfuturetimesteps,
and,moreover,helpstheexpectedsummationofdiscounted
rewards to converge if the horizon is inﬁnite [11].
Gt =E
L ∞É
k=0
kRt+k+1
M
(2)
The following subsections introduce important rein-
forcement learning concepts.
3.1. Policy and Value Function
A policy deﬁnes the agent’s behavior by deﬁning the
probabilityoftakingaction awhilebeinginastate s,which
is expressed as (aðs). The agent evaluates its behavior
(action) using a value function, which can be eitherstate-
value function, which estimates how good it is to be in state
safterexecutinganaction a,orusinga action-valuefunction
that measures how good it is to select actiona while being
inastate s.Thevalueproducedbytheaction-valuefunction
in Equation 3 is known as the Q-value and is expressed in
terms of the expected summation of the discounted rewards
[11].
Q(s,a ) = E
L ∞É
k=0
kRt+k+1 ðSt =s,At =a
M
(3)
Sincetheobjectiveistomaximizetheexpectedsumma-
tion of discounted rewards under the optimal policy, the
agenttriestoﬁndtheoptimalQ-value Q∗(s,a )asdeﬁnedin
Equation 4. This optimal Q-value must satisfy theBellman
Optimality Equation5 which is deﬁned as the sum of the
expected reward received from executing the current action
Rt+1, and sum of all future rewards (discounted) received
from any possible future state-action pairs(s¨,a ¨). In other
words,theagenttriestoselecttheactionsthatgrantthehigh-
est rewards in an episode. In general, selecting the optimal
value means selecting the action with the highest Q-value;
however, the action with the highest Q-value sometimes
mightnotleadtobetterrewardingactionsinthefuture[11].
Q∗(s,a ) = max

Q(s,a ) (4)
Q∗(s,a ) = E
4
Rt+1 + max
a¨
Q∗(s¨,a ¨)
5
(5)
AlMahamid & Grolinger:Preprint submitted to Elsevier Page 3 of 24

===== PAGE 4 =====

Autonomous UAV Navigation using RL: A Systematic Review
3.2. Exploration vs Exploitation
Explorationvs.Exploitationmaybedemonstratedusing
the multi-armed bandit dilemma, which accurately portrays
thebehaviorofapersonexperiencingtheirﬁrstslotmachine
experience. The money (reward) player receives early in
the game is unrelated to any previously selected choices,
and as the player develops a comprehension of the reward,
he/she begins selecting choices that contribute to earning a
greaterreward.Thechoicesmaderandomlybytheplayerto
acquireknowledgemightbedeﬁnedastheplayer Exploring
the environment. In contrast, the player’sExploiting the
environment is described as the options selected based on
his/her experience.
The RL agent needs to ﬁnd the right balance between
explorationandexploitationtomaximizetheexpectedreturn
of rewards. Constantly exploiting the environment and se-
lectingtheactionwiththehighestrewarddoesnotguarantee
thattheagentperformstheoptimalactionbecausetheagent
may miss out on a higher reward provided by future actions
taking alternative sets of actions in the future. Finding the
ratio between exploration and exploitation can be deﬁned
throughdiﬀerentstrategiessuchas -greedystrategy,Upper
Conﬁdence Bound (UCB), and Gradient Bandits [12].
3.3. Experience Replay
RL agent does not need data to learn; rather, it learns
from experiences by interacting with the environment. The
agent experiencee can be formulated as tuplee(s,a,s ¨,r ),
which describes the agent taking an actiona at a given
state s and receiving a rewardr for the performed action
and causing a new states¨. Experience Replay (ER)[13]
is a technique that suggests storing experiences in a replay
memory (buﬀer)D and using a batch of uniformly sampled
experiences for RL agent training.
Ontheotherhand, PrioritizedExperienceReplay(PER)
[14] prioritizes experiences according to their signiﬁcance
usingTemporal Diﬀerence error (TD-error)and replays ex-
periences with lower TD-error to repeatedly train the agent,
which improves the convergence.
3.4. On-Policy vs Oﬀ-Policy
In order to interact with the environment, the RL agent
attempts to learn two policies: the ﬁrst one is referred to
as the target policy(aðs), which the agent learns through
the value function, and the second one is referred to as
the behavior policy(aðs), which the agent uses for action
selection when interacting with the environment.
A RL algorithm is referred to ason-policy algorithm
when the same target policy(aðs) is employed to collect
the training sample and to determine the expected return. In
contrast, oﬀ-policy algorithmsare those where the training
sample is collected in accordance to the behavior policy
(aðs),andtheexpectedrewardisgeneratedusingthetarget
policy (aðs) [15]. Another main diﬀerence is that Oﬀ-
policy algorithms can reuse past experiences and do not
require all the experiences within an episode (full episode)
to generate training samples, and the experiences can be
collected from diﬀerent episodes.
3.5. Deep Reinforcement Learning
Deep Reinforcement Learning (DRL) uses deep agents
tolearntheoptimalpolicywhereitcombinesartiﬁcialNeu-
ral Networks (NN) with Reinforcement Learning (RL). The
NNtypeusedinDRLvariesfromoneapplicationtoanother
depending on the problem being solved, inputs type (state),
andthenumberofinputspassedtotheNN.Forexample,the
RL framework can be integrated with Convolutional Neural
Network(CNN)toprocessimagesrepresentingtheenviron-
ment’s state or combined with Recurrent Neural Network
(RNN) to process inputs over diﬀerent time steps.
The NN loss function, also known as the Temporal
Diﬀerence (TD), is generically computed by ﬁnding the
diﬀerencebetweentheoutputoftheNN Q(s,a )andtheop-
timal Q-valueQ∗(s,a )obtained from the Bellman equation
as shown in Equation 6 [11]:
Target
©­­­­­­­­­­­­­­­­­­­®­­­­­­­­­­­­­­­­­­­ª
E
4
Rt+1 + max
a¨
Q∗(s¨,a ¨)
5
−
Predicted
©­­­­­­­­­­®­­­­­­­­­­ª
E
L ∞É
k=0
kRt+k+1
M
(6)
The architecture of the deep agent can be simple or
complex based on the problem at hand, where a complex
architecturecombinesmultipleNN.Butwhatalldeepagents
haveincommonisthattheyreceivethestateasaninput,then
theyoutputtheoptimalactionandmaximizethediscounted
return of rewards.
The application of Deep NN to the RL framework en-
abled the research community to solve more complex prob-
lems in autonomous systems that were hard to solve before
and achieve better performance than previous state-of-the-
art, such as drone navigation and avoiding obstacles using
images received from the drone’s monocular camera.
4. Autonomous UAV Navigation using DRL
Diﬀerent DRL algorithms and techniques were used to
solve various problems in autonomous UAV navigation,
such as UAV control, obstacle avoidance, path planning,
and ﬂocking. The DRL agent acted as an expert in all of
theseproblems,selectingthebestactionthatmaximizesthe
reward to achieve the desired objective. The input and the
outputoftheDRLalgorithmaregenerallydeterminedbased
on the desired objective and the implemented technique.
RL agent design for UAV navigation depicted in Figure
2 shows diﬀerent UAV input devices used to capture the
state processed by the RL agent. The agent produces action
values that can be either the movement values of the UAV
or the waypoint values where the UAV needs to relocate.
Once the agent executes the action in the environment, it
receivesthenewstateandthegeneratedrewardbasedonthe
performedaction.Therewardfunctionisdesignedtogener-
ate the reward subject to the intended objective while using
variousinformationfromtheenvironment.Theagentdesign
(’Agent’boxintheﬁgure)isinﬂuencedbytheRLalgorithms
discussedinSection6wheretheagentcomponentsandinner
working varies from one algorithm to another.
AlMahamid & Grolinger:Preprint submitted to Elsevier Page 4 of 24

===== PAGE 5 =====

Autonomous UAV Navigation using RL: A Systematic Review
Figure 2:RL agent design for UAV navigation task
Table 1 summarizes the application of RL to diﬀerent
UAV navigation tasks (objectives), and the following sub-
sections discuss the UAV navigation tasks in more detail.
As seen from this table, most of the research focused on
twoUAVnavigationobjectives:1)Obstacleavoidanceusing
various UAV sensor devices such as cameras and LIDARs
and 2) Path planning to ﬁnd the optimal or shortest route.
4.1. UAV Control
RL is used to control the movement of the UAV in the
environment by applying changes to the ﬂight mechanics of
the UAV, which varies based on the UAV type. In general
UAVscanbeclassiﬁedbasedontheﬂightmechanicsinto1)
Multirotor,2)Fixed-Wing,and3)single-rotor,and4)ﬁxed-
wing hybrid Vertical Take-Oﬀ and Landing (VTOL) [92].
Multirotor, also known as multicopter or drone, uses
more than two rotors to control the ﬂight mechanics by
applying diﬀerent amounts of thrust to the rotors causing
changes in principal axes leading to four UAV movements
1)pitch,2)roll,3)yaw,and4)throttleasexplainedinFigure
3.Similarly,single-rotorandﬁxed-winghybridVTOLapply
changestodiﬀerentrotorstogeneratethedesiredmovement,
except they both use tilt-rotor(s) and wings in ﬁxed-wing
hybrid VTOL. On the other hand, ﬁxed-wing can only
achieve three actions pitch, roll, and yaw, where they take
oﬀbygeneratingenoughspeedthatcausestheair-dynamics
to lift-up the UAV.
Quad-rotorshasfourpropellers:twodiagonalpropellers
rotateclockwiseandtheothertwopropellersrotatecounter-
clockwise causing the throttle action. When the propellers
generateathrustmoresigniﬁcantthantheUAVweightthey
cause elevation, and when the thrust power equals the UAV
weight,theUAVstopselevationandstartshoveringinplace.
Incontrast,ifallpropellersrotateinthesamedirection,they
cause a yaw action in the opposite direction, as shown in
Figure 4.
AlMahamid & Grolinger:Preprint submitted to Elsevier Page 5 of 24

===== PAGE 6 =====

Autonomous UAV Navigation using RL: A Systematic Review
Table 1
DRL application to diﬀerent UAV Navigation tasks
Objective Sub-Objective Paper
UAV Control Controlling UAV ﬂying behavior (attitude control) [5, 16–22]
Obstacle Avoidance Obstacle avoidance using images and sensor information [21, 23–58]
Obstacle avoidance while considering the battery level [59]
Path Planning
Local and global path planning (ﬁnding the shortest/optimal route)[24, 26, 44, 51, 55, 58, 60–70]
Path planning while considering the battery level [24, 71, 72]
Find ﬁxed or moving targets (points of interest) [58, 67, 73–77]
Landing the UAV on a selected point [78–80]
Flocking
Maintain speed and orientation with other UAVs (formation) [39, 81–83]
Obstacle avoidance [83, 84]
Target tracking [85–89]
Flocking while considering the battery level [86]
Covering geographical region [86, 90]
Path planning and ﬁnding the safest route [83, 91]
Figure 3:Multirotor Flight Mechanics
The steps described in Figure 5 depicts the RL process
used to control the UAV, which depends on the used RL al-
gorithm,butthemostimportanttakeawayisthatRLusesthe
UAVstatetoproduceactions.Theseactionsareresponsible
for moving the UAV in the environment and can be either
direct changes in the value of pitch, roll, yaw, and throttle
values or indirect changes that require transformation to
commands understood by the UAV.
4.2. Obstacle Avoidance
Avoiding obstacles is an essential task required by the
UAVtonavigateanyenvironment,whichcanbeachievedby
estimatingthedistancetotheobjectsintheenvironmentus-
ingdiﬀerentdevicessuchasfront-facingcamerasordistance
sensors. The output generated by these diﬀerent devices
provides input to the RL algorithm and plays a signiﬁcant
role in the NN architecture.
Lu et al. [1] described diﬀerent front-facing cameras
such as monocular cameras, stereo cameras, and RGB-D
cameras that a UAV can use. Each camera type produces
a diﬀerent image type used as raw input to the RL agent.
However, regardless of the camera type, these images can
be preprocessed using computer vision to produce speciﬁc
image types as described below:
Figure 4:Yaw vs Throttle Mechanics
• RGB Images: are renowned colored images where
each pixel is represented in three values (Red, Green,
Blue) ranging between(0, 255).
• Depth-Map Images: contains information related to
the distance of the objects from the Field Of View
(FOV).
• Event-Based Images: are special images that output
the changes in brightness intensity instead of stan-
dard images. Event-based images are produced by an
event camera, also known as Dynamic Vision Sensor
(DVS).
RGB images lack depth information, and, therefore, the
agent cannot estimate how far or close the UAV is to the
object leading to unexpected ﬂying behavior. On the other
hand,depthinformationisessentialforbuildingasuccessful
reward function that penalizes moving closer to the objects.
Some techniques used RGB images and depth-map simul-
taneously as input to the agent to provide more information
abouttheenvironment.Incontrast,event-basedimagesdata
arerepresentedasone-dimensionalsequencesofeventsover
time,whichisusedtocapturequicklychanginginformation
in the scene [23].
AlMahamid & Grolinger:Preprint submitted to Elsevier Page 6 of 24

===== PAGE 7 =====

Autonomous UAV Navigation using RL: A Systematic Review
Figure 5:UAV Control using RL
Similartocameras,distancesensorshavediﬀerenttypes,
such as LiDAR, RADAR, and acoustic sensors: they esti-
matethedistanceofthesurroundingobjectstotheUAVbut
require less storage size than 2D images since they do not
use RGB channels.
Theoutputgeneratedbythesedevicesreﬂectsthediﬀer-
ent states that the UAV has over time, used as an input to
the RL agent to make actions causing the UAV to move in
diﬀerent directions to avoid obstacles. The NN architecture
of the RL agent is based on: 1) input type, 2) the number
of inputs, and 3) the used algorithm. For example, pro-
cessing RGB images or depth-map images using the DQN
algorithm requires Convolutional Neural Network (CNN)
followedbyfully-connectlayerssinceCNNisknownforits
power in processing images. In contrast, processing event-
based images is performed using Spiking Neural Networks
(SNN),whichisdesignedtohandlespatio-temporaldataand
identify spatio-temporal patterns [23].
4.3. Path Planning
Autonomous UAVs must have a well-deﬁned objective
before executing a ﬂying mission. Typically, the goal is to
ﬂy from a start to a destination point, such as in delivery
drones. But, the goal can also be more sophisticated, such
as performing surveillance by hovering over a geographical
area or participating in search and rescue operations to ﬁnd
a missing person.
Autonomous UAV navigation requires path planning to
ﬁnd the best UAV path to achieve the ﬂying objective while
avoiding obstacles. The optimal path does not always mean
the shortest path or a straight line between two points;
instead, the UAV aims to ﬁnd a safe path while considering
UAV’s limited power and ﬂying mission.
Path planning can be divided into two main types:
• Global Path Planning: concerned with planning the
pathfromthestartpointtodestinationpointinattempt
to select the optimal path.
• Local Path Planning: concerned with planning the
local optimal waypoints in an attempt to avoid static
and dynamic obstacles while considering the ﬁnal
destination.
Path planning can be solved using diﬀerent techniques
and algorithms; in this work, we focus on RL techniques
used to solve global and local path planning, where the RL
agent receives information from the environment and out-
putstheoptimalwaypointsaccordingtotherewardfunction.
RLtechniquescanbeclassiﬁedaccordingtotheusageofthe
environment’s local information 1) map-based navigation
and 2) mapless navigation.
4.3.1. Map-Based Navigation
A UAV that adopts map-based navigation uses a repre-
sentationoftheenvironmenteitherin3Dor2Dformat.The
representation might include one or more of the following
about the environment: 1) the diﬀerent terrains, 2) ﬁxed-
obstacles locations, and 3) charging/ground stations.
Some maps oversimplify the environment representa-
tion: the map is divided into a grid with equally-sized
smaller cells that store information about the environment
[68,73,93].Othersoversimplifytheenvironment’sstructure
by simplifying objects representation or by using 1D/2D to
representtheenvironment[34,36,39,41,47,55,65,67,74,
86, 87] . The UAV has to plan a safe and optimal path over
the cells to avoid cells containing obstacles until it reaches
its destination and has to plan its stopover at the charging
stations based on the battery level and path length.
In a more realistic scenario, the UAV calculates a route
using the map information and the GPS signal to track the
UAV’scurrentlocation,startingpoint,anddestinationpoint.
The RL agent evaluates the change in the distance and the
angle between the UAV’s current GPS location and target
GPS location, and penalizes the reward if the diﬀerence
increases or if the path is unsafe depending on the reward
function (objective).
4.3.2. Mapless Navigation
Mapless navigation does not rely on maps; instead, it
applies computer vision techniques to extract features from
the environment and learn the diﬀerent patterns to reach
the destination, which requires computation resources that
might be overwhelming for some UAVs.
Localization information of the UAV obtained by dif-
ferent means such as Global Positioning System (GPS)
AlMahamid & Grolinger:Preprint submitted to Elsevier Page 7 of 24

===== PAGE 8 =====

Autonomous UAV Navigation using RL: A Systematic Review
or Inertial Measurement Unit (IMU) is used in mapless
navigation to plan the optimal path. DRL agent receives
the scene image, the destination target, and the localization
information as input and outputs the change in the UAV
movements.
For example, Zhouet al.[50] calculated and tracked the
anglebetweentheUAVanddestinationpoint,thenencoded
it with the depth image extracted from the scene and used
both as a state representation for the DRL agent. Although
localization information seems essential to plan the path,
some techniques achieved navigation with high speed using
monocular visual reactive navigation system without a GPS
[94].
4.4. Flocking
Although UAVs are known for performing individual
tasks,theycanﬂocktoperformtaskseﬃcientlyandquickly,
which requires maintaining ﬂight formation. UAV ﬂocking
hasmanyapplications,suchassearchandrescueoperations
to cover a wide geographical area.
UAV ﬂocking is considered a more sophisticated task
than a single UAV ﬂying mission because UAVs need to
orchestrate their ﬂight to maintain ﬂight formation while
performing other tasks such as UAV control and obstacle
avoidance. Flocking can be executed using diﬀerent topolo-
gies:
• Flock Centering: maintaining ﬂight formation as sug-
gested by Reynolds [95] involves three concepts: 1)
ﬂock centering, 2) avoiding obstacles, and 3) velocity
matching. This topology was applied in several re-
search papers [82, 96–99].
• Leader-Follower Flocking: the ﬂock leader has its
mission of reaching destination, while the followers
(other UAVs) ﬂock with the leader with a mission of
maintainingdistanceandrelativepositiontotheleader
[100, 101].
• Neighbors Flocking: close neighbors coordinate with
each other, where each UAV communicates with two
or more nearest neighbors to maintain ﬂight forma-
tion by maintaining relative distance and angle to the
neighbors [81, 102, 103].
MaintainingﬂightformationusingRLrequirescommu-
nication between UAVs to learn the best policy to maintain
the formation while avoiding obstacles. These RL systems
can be trained using a single agent or multi-agents in cen-
tralized or distributed settings.
4.4.1. Centralized Training
AcentralizedRLagenttrainsasharedﬂockingpolicyto
maintain the ﬂock formation using the experience collected
fromallUAVs,whileeachUAVactsindividuallyaccording
to its local environment information such as obstacles. The
rewardfunctionofthecentralizedagentcanbecustomizedto
servetheﬂockingtopology,suchasﬂockcenteringorleader-
follower ﬂocking.
Yanetal. [39]usedProximalPolicyOptimization(PPO)
algorithm to train a centralized shared ﬂocking control pol-
icy,whereeachUAVﬂocksascloseaspossibletothecenter
and decentralized execution for obstacle avoidance accord-
ing to each UAV local environment information. Similarly,
Hung and Givigi [101] trained a leader UAV to reach a
destination while avoiding obstacles and trained a shared
policy for followers to ﬂock with the leader considering the
relative dynamics between the leader and the followers.
Zhao et al. [57] used a Multi-Agent Reinforcement
Learning(MARL) totraina centralizedﬂockcontrol policy
shared by all UAVs with decentralized execution. MARL
receivedposition,speed,andﬂightpathanglefromallUAVs
ateachtimestepandtriedtoﬁndtheoptimalﬂockingcontrol
policy.
The centralized training would not produce a good gen-
eralization in neighbors ﬂocking topology since the learned
policy for one neighbor is diﬀerent from other neighbors’
policies due to the diﬀerences in neighbors’ dynamics.
4.4.2. Distributed Training
UAV ﬂocking can be trained using a distributed (decen-
tralized) approach, where each UAV has its designated RL
agentresponsibleforﬁndingtheoptimalﬂockpolicyforthe
UAV. The reward function is deﬁned to maintain distance
andﬂyingdirectionwithotherUAVsandcanbecustomized
to include further information depending on the objective.
Flight information such as location and heading angle
shouldbecommunicatedtootherUAVssincetheRLagents
are distributed, and the state representation must include
information of other UAVs. Any UAV that fails to receive
the information from other UAVs will cause the UAV to be
isolated from the ﬂock.
Liuetal. [86]proposedadecentralizedDRLframework
to control each UAV in a distributed setting to maximize
averagecoveragescore,geographicalfairness,andminimize
UAVs’ energy consumption.
5. UAV Navigation Frameworks and
Simulation Software
Subsection 5.1 discusses and classiﬁes the UAV naviga-
tionframeworksbasedontheUAVnavigationobjectives/sub-
objectives explained in Section 4, and identiﬁes categories
such as Path Planning Frameworks, Flocking Frameworks,
Energy-Aware UAV Navigation Frameworks, and others.
On the other hand, Subsection 5.2 explains the simulation
software’s components and the most common simulation
software utilized to perform the experiments.
5.1. UAV Navigation Frameworks
In general, a software framework is a conceptual struc-
ture analogous to a blueprint used to guide the compre-
hending construction of the software by deﬁning diﬀerent
functions and their interrelationships. By deﬁnition, RL can
be considered a framework by itself. Therefore, we consid-
eredonlyUAVnavigationframeworksthataddtotraditional
navigation using sensors or camera data for navigation. As
a result, Table 2 classiﬁes UAV frameworks based on the
framework objective. The subsequent sections discuss the
frameworks in more detail.
AlMahamid & Grolinger:Preprint submitted to Elsevier Page 8 of 24

===== PAGE 9 =====

Autonomous UAV Navigation using RL: A Systematic Review
Table 2
UAV Navigation Frameworks
Framework Objective Papers
Energy-aware UAV Navigation [59, 71]
Path Planning [30, 32, 47, 60, 62, 66, 70]
Flocking [61, 91]
Vision-Based Frameworks [42, 43, 73, 77]
Transfer Learning [40]
5.1.1. Energy-Aware UA V Navigation Frameworks
UAVs has limited ﬂight time, hence operate mainly
usingbatteries.Therefore,planningﬂightrouteandrecharge
stopover are crucial to reach destinations. Energy-aware
UAVnavigationframeworksaimtoprovideobstaclesavoid-
ancenavigationwhileconsideringtheUAVbatterycapacity.
Bouhamed et al.[59] developed a framework based on
Deep Deterministic Policy Gradient (DDPG) algorithm to
guide the UAV to a target position while communicating
with ground stations, allowing the UAV to recharge its bat-
tery if it drops below a speciﬁc threshold. Similarly, Iman-
berdiyevet al.[71] monitor battery level, rotors’ condition,
and sensor readings to plan the route and apply necessary
route changes for required battery charging.
5.1.2. Path Planning Frameworks
Path planning is the process of determining the most
eﬃcientroutethatmeetstheﬂightobjective,suchasﬁnding
the shortest, fastest, or safest route. Diﬀerent frameworks
[47, 60] implemented a modular path planning scheme,
where each module has a specialized function to achieve
while exchanging data with other modules to train action
selection policies and discover the optimal path.
Similarly,Li etal. [32]developedafour-layerframework
inwhicheachlayergeneratesasetofobjectiveandconstraint
functions.Thefunctionsareintendedtoservethelowerlayer
and consider the upper layer’s objectives and constraints,
with their primary goal generating trajectories.
Other frameworks suggested stage-based learning to
choose actions from the desired stage depending on current
environment encounters. For example, Camci and Kay-
acan [66] proposed learning a set of motion primitives
oﬄine, then using them online to design quick maneuvers
to enable switching seamlessly between two modes:near-
hover motions, which is responsible for generating motion
plans allowing a stable completion of maneuvers andswift
maneuversto deal smoothly with abrupt inputs.
In a collaborative setting, Zhanget al.[62] suggested a
coalition between Unmanned Ground Vehicle (UGV) and
UAV complementing each other to reach the destination,
where UAV cannot get to far locations alone due to limited
battery power, and UGV cannot reach high altitude due to
limited abilities.
5.1.3. Flocking Frameworks
UAV ﬂocking frameworks have functionality beyond
UAV navigation while maintaining ﬂight formation. For
example, Bouhamedet al.[61] presented a RL-based spa-
tiotemporal scheduling system for autonomous UAVs. The
system enables UAVs to autonomously arrange their sched-
ules to cover the most signiﬁcant number of pre-scheduled
events physically and temporally spread throughout a spec-
iﬁed geographical region and time horizon. On the other
hand,Majd etal. [91]predictedthemovementofdronesand
dynamicobstaclesintheﬂyingzonetogenerateeﬃcientand
safe routes.
5.1.4. Vision-Based Frameworks
Vision-Based Framework depends on UAV camera for
navigation, where the images produced by the camera are
used to draw on additional functionality for improved navi-
gation.Itispossibletoemployframeworksthataugmentthe
agent’s CNN architecture to fuse data from several sensors,
use Long-Short Term Memory cells (LSTM) to maintain
navigationchoices,useRNNtocapturetheUAVstatesover
diﬀerent time steps, or pre-process images to provide more
information about the environment [42, 42, 43].
5.1.5. Transfer Learning Frameworks
UAVs are trained on target environments before exe-
cuting the ﬂight mission; the training is carried either in a
virtualorreal-worldenvironment.TheUAVrequiresretrain-
ing when introduced to new environments or moving from
virtual training as the environments have diﬀerent terrains
and obstacle structures or textures. Besides, UAV training
requires a long time and it is hardware resource intensive
while actual UAVs have limited hardware resources. There-
fore,whenUAVisintroducedtonewenvironments,transfer
learning frameworks reduce the training time by reusing
the NN weights trained from the previous environment and
retraining only parts of the agent’s NN.
Yoonetal. [40]proposedalgorithm-hardwareco-design,
wheretheUAVistrainedinavirtualenvironment,andafter
the UAV is deployed to a real-world environment; the agent
loadstheweightsstoredinembeddedNon-VolatileMemory
(eNVM), and then evaluates new actions and only trains the
lastfewlayersofCNNwhoseweightsarestoredintheon-die
SRAM (Static Random Access Memory).
5.2. Simulation Software
Theresearchcommunityuseddiﬀerentevaluationmeth-
ods for autonomous UAV navigation using RL. Simulation
software is used widely over actual UAVs to execute the
evaluationduetothecostofthehardware(drone)inaddition
tothecostofreplacementpartsrequiredduetoUAVcrashes.
Comparisonbetweensimulationsoftwareisnottheintended
purpose, rather than making the research community aware
ofthemostcommonlyusedtoolsforevaluationasillustrated
in Figure 6. 3D UAV navigation simulation requires mainly
three components as illustrated in Figure 7:
• RL Agent:represents the RL algorithm used with all
computationsrequiredtogeneratethereward,process
the states, and compute the optimal action. RL Agent
interacts directly with theUAV Flight simulatorto
send/receive UAV actions/states.
AlMahamid & Grolinger:Preprint submitted to Elsevier Page 9 of 24

===== PAGE 10 =====

Autonomous UAV Navigation using RL: A Systematic Review
• UAV Flight Simulator:responsible for simulating
the UAV movements and interactions with the 3D
environment,suchasobtainingimagesfromtheUAV
camera or reporting UAV crashes with diﬀerent ob-
stacles. Examples of UAV ﬂight simulators are Robot
Operatingsystems(ROS)[104]andMicrosoftAirSim
[105].
• 3D Graphics Engine:provides a 3D graphics envi-
ronmentwiththephysicsengine,whichisresponsible
for simulating the gravity and dynamics similar to
the real world. Examples of 3D graphics engines are
Gazebo [106] and Unreal Engine [107].
Due to compatibility/support issues, ROS is used in
conjunctionwithGazebo,whereAirSimusesUnrealEngine
torunthesimulations.However,thethreecomponentsmight
not always be present, especially if the simulation software
has internal modules or plugins that provide the required
functionality, such as MATLAB.
6. Reinforcement Learning Algorithms
Classiﬁcation
The previous sections discussed the UAV navigation
tasksandframeworkswithoutelaboratingonRLalgorithms.
However, to choose a suitable algorithm for the application
environment and the navigation task, the comprehension of
RL algorithms and their characteristics is necessary. For
example, the DQN algorithm and its variations can be used
for UAV navigation tasks that use simple movement actions
(UP, DOWN, LEFT, RIGHT, FORWARD) since they are
discrete.Therefore,thissectionexaminesRLalgorithmsand
their characteristics.
AlMahamid and Grolinger [11] categorized RL algo-
rithms into three main categories according to the number
of states and the type of actions: 1) limited number of
states and discrete actions, 2) unlimited number of states
Figure 6:UAV Simulation Software Usage
Figure 7:UAV Simulation Software Components
and discrete actions, and 3) unlimited number of states and
continuousactions.Weextendthiswithsub-classes,analyze
more than 50 RL algorithms, and examine their use in UAV
navigation. Table 3 classiﬁes all RL algorithms found in
UAV Navigation studies and includes other prominent RL
algorithms to show the intersection between RL and UAV
navigation. Furthermore, this section discusses algorithms
characteristics and highlights RL applications in diﬀerent
UAV navigation studies. Note that Table 3 includes many
algorithms, but only the most prominent ones are discussed
in the following subsections.
6.1. Limited States and Discrete Actions
Generally, simple environments have a limited number
of states and the agent transitions between states by execut-
ing discrete (limited number) actions. For example, in a tic-
tac-toe game, the agent has a predeﬁned set of two actions
X or O that are used to update the nine boxes constituting
the predeﬁned set of known states. Q-Learning [108] and
State–Action–Reward–State–Action (SARSA) [110] algo-
rithmscanbeappliedtoenvironmentswithalimitednumber
ofstatesanddiscreteactions,wheretheymaintainaQ-Table
withallpossiblestatesandactionswhileiterativelyupdating
the Q-values for each state-action pair to ﬁnd the optimal
policy.
SARSA is similar to Q-Learning except to update the
current Q(s,a ) value it computes the next state-action
Q(s¨,a ¨) by executing the next actiona¨ [126]. In contrast,
Q-learning updates the currentQ(s,a ) value by computing
the next state-actionQ(s¨,a ¨) using the Bellman equation
since the next action is unknown, and takes a greedy action
by selecting the action that maximizes the reward [126].
6.2. Unlimited States and Discrete Actions
An RL agent uses Deep Neural Network (DNN) - usu-
ally a CNN, in complex environments such as the pong
game, where the states are unlimited and the actions are
discrete (UP, DOWN). The deep agent/DNN processes the
environment’s state as an input and outputs the Q-values
of the available actions. The following subsections discuss
the diﬀerent algorithms that can be used in this type of
the environment, such as DQN, Deep SARSA, and their
variations [11].
6.2.1. Deep Q-Networks Variations
Deep Q-Learning, also known as Deep Q-Network
(DQN)[111], is a primary method used in settings with an
unlimitednumberofstatesanddiscreteactions,anditserves
asaninspirationforotheralgorithmsusedforthesamegoal.
As illustrated in Figure 8 [29], DQN architecture frequently
employsconvolutionalandpoolinglayers,followedbyfully
connectedlayersthatprovideQ-valuescorrespondingtothe
number of actions. A signiﬁcant disadvantage of the DQN
algorithmisthatitoverestimatestheaction-value(Q-value),
withtheagentselectingtheactionswiththehighestQ-value,
which may not be the optimal action [151].
DoubleDQNsolvestheoverestimationissueinDQNby
using two networks. The ﬁrst network, known as the Policy
AlMahamid & Grolinger:Preprint submitted to Elsevier Page 10 of 24

===== PAGE 11 =====

Autonomous UAV Navigation using RL: A Systematic Review
Table 3
RL Algorithms usage and classiﬁcation
State Action Class Algorithm On/Oﬀ
Policy
Actor-
Critic
Multi-
Thread
Dis-
tributed
Multi-
Agent Usage
Limited
Discrete
Simple
RL
Q-Learning [108] - No No No No [17, 21, 24, 61, 63–
65, 67, 68, 74, 75, 109]
SARSA [110] - No No No No -
Unlimited
Discrete
DQN
Variations
DQN [111] Oﬀ No No No No
[19, 23, 25, 26, 33, 35, 37, 41, 44,
46, 47, 49, 55, 66, 70, 72, 77, 83,
88, 89, 109, 112]
Double DQN [113] Oﬀ No No No No [16, 26, 29, 31, 37, 40, 45, 52, 78,
79, 109]
Dueling DQN [114] Oﬀ No No No No [26, 37]
DRQN [115] Oﬀ No No No No [43, 58, 73, 76]
DD-DQN [114] Oﬀ No No No No [26, 48]
DD-DRQN Oﬀ No No No No -
Distributional
DQN
Noisy DQN [116] Oﬀ No No No No -
C51-DQN [117] Oﬀ No No No No -
QR-DQN [118] Oﬀ No No No No -
IQN [119] Oﬀ No No No No -
Rainbow DQN
[120] Oﬀ No No No No -
FQF [121] Oﬀ No No No No -
Distributed
DQN
R2D2 [122] Oﬀ No No Yes No -
Ape-X DQN [123] Oﬀ No No Yes No -
NGU [124] Oﬀ No No Yes No -
Agent57 [125] Oﬀ No No Yes No -
Deep SARSA
Variations
Deep SARSA [126] On No No No No -
Double SARSA On No No No No -
Dueling SARSA On No No No No -
DR-SARSA On No No No No -
DD-SARSA On No No No No -
DD-DR-SARSA On No No No No -
Continous
Policy
Based
REINFORCE [127] On No No No No -
TPRO [128] On No No No No [22]
PPO [129] On No No No No [18, 22, 38, 39, 51, 53, 56, 62, 69]
PPG [130] Oﬀ No No No No -
SVPG [131] Oﬀ No No No No -
Actor-Critic
SLAC [132] Oﬀ Yes No No No -
ACE [133] Oﬀ Yes Yes No No -
DAC [134] Oﬀ Yes No No No -
DPG [15] Oﬀ Yes No No No [20]
RDPG [135] Oﬀ Yes No No No -
DDPG [136] Oﬀ Yes No No No [22, 24, 30, 32, 34, 36, 42, 50, 54,
59, 80, 81, 84, 86]
TD3 [137] Oﬀ Yes No No No [87]
SAC [138] Oﬀ Yes No No No [34]
Multi-Agent and Distributed
Actor-Critic
Ape-X DPG [123] Oﬀ Yes No Yes No -
D4PG [139] Oﬀ Yes No Yes Yes -
A2C [140] On Yes Yes Yes No [76, 82]
DPPO [141] On No No Yes Yes -
A3C [140] On Yes Yes No Yes [36]
PAAC [142] On Yes Yes No No -
ACER [143] Oﬀ Yes Yes No No -
Reactor [144] Oﬀ Yes Yes No No -
ACKTR [145] On Yes Yes No No -
MADDPG [146] Oﬀ Yes No No Yes -
MATD3 [147] Oﬀ Yes No No Yes -
MAAC [148] Oﬀ Yes No No Yes [90]
IMPALA [149] Oﬀ Yes Yes Yes Yes -
SEED [150] Oﬀ Yes Yes Yes Yes -
AlMahamid & Grolinger:Preprint submitted to Elsevier Page 11 of 24

===== PAGE 12 =====

Autonomous UAV Navigation using RL: A Systematic Review
Figure 8:DQN using AlexNet CNN
Figure 9:DQN vs. Dueling DQN
Network, optimizes the Q-value, while the second network,
known as the Target Network, is a clone of the Policy
NetworkandisusedtogeneratetheestimatedQ-value[113].
Afteraspeciﬁednumberoftimesteps,theparametersofthe
target network network are updated by copying the policy
networkparametersinsteadofperformingbackpropagation.
Dueling DQN, as depicted in Figure 9 [114], is a fur-
ther enhancement to DQN. To improve Q-value evaluation,
Dueling DQN employs the following functions in place the
Q-value function:
• The State-Value functionV (s) quantiﬁes how desir-
able it is for an agent to be in a states.
• The Advantage-Value functionA(s,a ) assesses the
superiorityoftheselectedactioninagivenstate sover
other actions.
The two functions depicted in Figure 9 are integrated
using a custom aggregation layer to generate an estimate of
the state-action value function [114]. The aggregation layer
hasthesamevalueasthesumofthetwovaluesproducedby
the two functions:
Q(s,a ) = V (s) + A(s,a ) − 1
ðð
É
a¨
A(s,a ) (7)
The term 1
ðð
∑
a¨A(s,a ) denotes the mean, whereas
ðð denotes vectorA length. This assists theidentiﬁability
problem while having no eﬀect on the relative rank of the
A (and thus Q) values. This also improves the optimization
because the advantage function only needs to change as fast
as the mean [114].
AsexplainedbyWang etal. [114],DoubleDuelingDQN
(DD-DQN) extends DQN by combining Dueling DQN and
Double DQN to determine the optimal Q-value, with the
output of Dueling DQN passed to Double DQN.
The Deep Recurrent Q-Network (DRQN) [115] algo-
rithm is a DQN variation, using a recurrent LSTM layer in
placeoftheﬁrstfullyconnectedlayer.Thischangestheinput
from a single environment state to to a group of states as
a single input, which aids in the integration of information
overtime[115].Thetechniquesofdoublingandduelingcan
beutilizedindependentlyorincombinationwitharecurrent
neural network.
6.2.2. Distributional DQN
The goal of distributional Q-learning is to obtain a
moreaccuraterepresentationofthedistributionofobserved
rewards. Fortunatoet al.[116] introduced NoisyNet, a deep
reinforcement learning agent that uses gradient descent to
learn parametric noise added to the network weights, and
demonstratedhowtheagent’spolicy’sinducedstochasticity
can be used to aid eﬃcient exploration [116].
Categorical Deep Q-Networks (C51-DQN)[117] applied
a distributional perspective using Wasserstein metric to the
random return received by Bellman’s equation to approxi-
mate value distributions instead of the value function. The
algorithm ﬁrst performs a heuristic projection step and then
minimizes the Kullback-Leibler (KL) divergence between
the projected Bellman update and the prediction [117].
Quantile Regression Deep Q-Networks (QR-DQN)[118]
performs a distributional reinforcement learning over the
Wassersteinmetricinastochasticapproximationsetting.Us-
ingWassersteindistance,thetargetdistributionisminimized
by stochastically adjusting the distributions’ locations using
quantile regression [118]. QR-DQN assigns ﬁxed, uniform
probabilities toN adjustable locations and minimizes the
quantile Huber loss between the Bellman updated distri-
bution and current return distribution [121], whereas C51-
DQN uses N ﬁxed locations (N = 51 ) for distribution
approximation and adjusts the locations probabilities [118].
ImplicitQuantileNetworks(IQN) [119]incorporatesQR-
DQN [118] to learn full quantile function controlled by the
size of the network and the amount of training, in contrast
to QR-DQN quantile function that learns a discrete set of
quantilesdependentonthenumberofquantilesoutput[119].
IQN distribution function assumes the base distribution to
be non-uniform and reparameterizes samples from a base
distribution to the respective quantile values of a target
distribution.
Rainbow DQN [120] combines several improvements of
the traditional DQN algorithm into a single algorithm, such
as 1) addressing the overestimation bias,2) using Priori-
tizedExperienceReplay(PER)[14], 3)usingDuelingDQN
[114], 4) shifting the bias-variance trade-oﬀ and propagat-
ing newly observed rewards faster to earlier visited states
as implemented in A3C [140],5) learning a distributional
reinforcementlearninginsteadoftheexpectedreturnsimilar
AlMahamid & Grolinger:Preprint submitted to Elsevier Page 12 of 24

===== PAGE 13 =====

Autonomous UAV Navigation using RL: A Systematic Review
toC51-DQN[117],and 6)implementingstochasticnetwork
layers using Noisy DQN [116].
Yangetal. [121]proposed FullyparameterizedQuan-
tileFunction(FQF) fordistributionalRLprovidingfullpa-
rameterizationforbothquantilefractionsandcorresponding
quantile values. In contrast, QR-DQN [118] and IQN [119]
only parameterize the corresponding quantile values, while
quantile fractions are either ﬁxed or sampled [121].
FQFfordistributionalRLusestwonetworks:1)quantile
valuenetworkthatmapsquantilefractionstocorresponding
quantile values, and 2) fraction proposal network that gen-
erates quantile fractions for each state-action pair with the
goal of distribution approximation while minimizing the 1-
Wasserstein distance between the approximated and actual
distribution [121].
6.2.3. Distributed DQN
DistributedDRLarchitectureusedbydiﬀerentRLalgo-
rithmsasdepictedinFigure10[125]aimstodecoupleacting
from learning in distributed settings relaying on prioritized
experience replay to focus on the signiﬁcant experiences
generated by actors. The actors share the same NN and
replay experience buﬀer, where they interact with the en-
vironment and store their experiences in the shared replay
experience buﬀer. On the other hand, the learner replays
prioritized experiences from the shared experience buﬀer
and updates the learner NN accordingly [123]. In theory,
both acting and learning can be distributed across multiple
workers or running on the same machine [123].
Ape-XDQN [123],basedontheApe-Xframework,wasthe
ﬁrst algorithm to suggest distributed DRL, which was later
extended by Recurrent Replay Distributed DQN (R2D2)
[122] with two main diﬀerences: 1) R2D2 adds an LSTM
layer after the convolutional stack to overcome partial ob-
servability, and 2) it trains a recurrent neural network from
randomly sampled replay sequences using the “burn-in”
strategy,whichproducesastartstatethroughusingaportion
Figure 10:Distributed DRL agent scheme
of the replay sequence and updates the network only on the
remaining part of the sequence [122].
Never Give Up (NGA) [124] is another algorithm that
combines R2D2 architecture with a novel approach that
encouragestheagenttolearnexploratorystrategiesthrough-
out the training process using a compound intrinsic reward
consisting of two modules:
• Life-longnoveltymoduleusesRandomNetworkDis-
tillation(RND)[152],whichconsistsoftwonetworks
usedtogenerateanintrinsicreward:1)targetnetwork,
and 2) prediction network. This mechanism is known
as curiosity because it motivates the agent to explore
theenvironmentbygoingtonovelorunfamiliarstates.
• Episodicnoveltymoduleusesdynamically-sizedepisodic
memory M that stores the controllable states in an
online fashion, then turns state-action counts into a
bonus reward, where the count is computed using the
k-nearest neighbors.
While NGA uses intrinsic reward to promote explo-
ration, it promotes exploitation by generating extrinsic re-
ward using the Universal Value Function Approximator
(UVFA). NGA uses conditional architecture with shared
weightstolearnafamilyofpoliciesthatseparateexploration
and exploitation [124].
Agent57[125]istheﬁrstRLalgorithmthatoutperformsthe
human benchmark on all 57 games of Atari 2600. Agent57
implementsNGAalgorithmswiththemaindiﬀerenceofap-
plying an adaptive mechanism for exploration-exploitation
trade-oﬀ and utilizes parameterization of the architecture
that allows for more consistent and stable learning [125].
6.2.4. Deep SARSA
SARSAisbasedonQ-learningandisdesignedforsitua-
tionswithlimitedstatesanddiscreteactions,asexplainedin
subsection 6.1. Deep SARSA [126] uses a deep neural net-
work similar to DQN and has the same extensions: Double
SARSA, Dueling SARSA, Double Dueling SARSA (DD-
SARSA), Deep Recurrent SARSA (DR-SARSA), and Dou-
ble Dueling Deep Recurrent (DD-DR-SARSA). The main
diﬀerencecomparedtoDQNisthatDeepSARSAcomputes
Q(s¨,a ¨)bytakingthenextaction a¨,whichisnecessaryto
determinethecurrentstate-action Q(s,a )ratherthantaking
a greedy action that maximizes the reward.
6.3. Unlimited States and Continuous Actions
While discrete actions are adequate to drive a car or
unmanned aerial vehicle in a simulated environment, they
do not enable realistic movements in real-world scenarios.
Continuous actions specify the quantity of movement in
various directions, and the agent does not select from a
predetermined set of actions. For instance, a realistic UAV
movement deﬁnes the amount of roll, pitch, yaw, and throt-
tle changes necessary to navigate the environment while
avoiding obstacles, as opposed to ﬂying the UAV in preset
directions: forward, left, right, up, and down [11].
Continuous action space demands learning a parameter-
ized policy that maximizes the expected summation of
AlMahamid & Grolinger:Preprint submitted to Elsevier Page 13 of 24

===== PAGE 14 =====

Autonomous UAV Navigation using RL: A Systematic Review
discounted rewards since it is not feasible to determine the
action-valueQ(s,a )forallcontinuousactionsinalldistinct
states. Learning a parameterized policy is considered a
maximizationproblem,whichcanbehandledusinggradient
descentmethodstogettheoptimal inthefollowingmanner
[11]:
t+1 =t +∇J (t) (8)
Here, ( is the gradient and is the learning rate.
Thegoaloftherewardfunction J istomaximizetheex-
pected reward applying the following parameterized policy
 [12]:
J () =
É
s∈S
 (s)V (s)
=
É
s∈S
 (s)
É
a∈A
Q (s,a )(aðs)
(9)
where (s)denotesthestationaryprobability  start-
ingfromstate s0 andtransitioningtofuturestatesaccording
tothepolicy .Todeterminethebest thatmaximizesthe
functionJ (),thegradient ( J ()iscalculatedasfollows:
∇J () = ∇
0É
s∈S
 (s)
É
a∈A
Q (s,a )(aðs)
1
∝
É
s∈S
(s)
É
a∈A
Q (s,a ) ∇(aðs)
(10)
Due to the fact that∑
s∈S(s) = 1 and the action space
is continuous, Equation 10 can be rewritten as:
∇J () = Es∼,a∼

Q (s,a ) ∇ ln(atðst)

(11)
Equation 12 [15], referred to as the oﬀ-policy gradient
theorem, deﬁnes the policy change in relation to the ratio of
target policy(aðs) to behavior policy(aðs). Take note
that the training sample is selected according to the target
policys ∼,and theexpected returnis calculatedfor the
same policy, where the training sample adheres to the
behavior policy(aðs).
∇J () = Es∼,a∼
(aðs)
(aðs)Q (s,a ) ∇ ln(atðst)

(12)
The policy gradient theorem depicted in Equation 9
[153] served as the foundation for a variety of other Policy
Gradients (PG) algorithms, including REINFORCE, Actor-
Critic algorithms, and various multi-agent and distributed
actor-critic algorithms.
6.3.1. Policy-Based Algorithms
Policy-based algorithms are devoted to improving the
gradientdescentperformancebymeansofapplyingdiﬀerent
methods such as REINFORCE [127], Trust Region Policy
Optimization (TRPO) [128], Proximal Policy Optimization
(PPO)[129],PhasicPolicyGradient(PPG)[130],andStein
Variational Policy Gradient (SVPG) [131].
REINFORCE
REINFORCE is a Monte-Carlo policy gradient approach
thatcreatesasamplebyselectingfromanentireepisodepro-
portionally to the gradient and updates the policy parameter
withthestepsize .Giventhat E[GtðSt,At] = Q(s,a ),
REINFORCE may be deﬁned as follows [12]:
∇J () = E

Gt ∇ ln(AtðSt)

(13)
The Monte Carlo method has a high variance and, hence, a
slowpaceoflearning.Bysubtractingthebaselinevaluefrom
the expected returnGt, REINFORCE decreases variance
and accelerates learning while maintaining the bias [12].
Trust Region Policy Optimization (TRPO)
Trust Region Policy Optimization (TRPO) [128] belongs to
a category of PG methods: it enhances gradient descent by
performingprotractedstepsinsidetrustzonesspeciﬁedbya
KL-Divergence constraint and updates the policy after each
trajectory instead of after each state [11]. Proximal Policy
Optimization(PPO)[129]maybethoughtofasanextension
ofTRPO,wheretheKL-Divergenceconstraintisappliedas
a penalty and the objective is clipped to guarantee that the
optimization occurs within a predetermined range [154].
PhasicPolicyGradient(PPG) [130]isanextensionofPPO
[129]:itincorporatesarecurringauxiliaryphasethatdistills
information from the value function into the policy network
to enhance the training while maintaining decoupling.
Stein Variational Policy Gradient (SVPG) Stein Vari-
ationalPolicyGradient(SVPG)[131]algorithmupdatesthe
policy using Stein variational gradient descent (SVGD)
[155], therefore reducing variance and improving conver-
gence.WhenusedinconjunctionwithREINFORCEandthe
advantage actor-critic algorithms, SVPG enhances average
return and data eﬃciency [155].
6.3.2. Actor-Critic
Theterm"Actor-Criticalgorithms"referstoacollection
of algorithms based on the policy gradients theorem. They
are composed of two components:
1. The Actor who is liable of ﬁnding the optimal policy
.
2. TheCriticwhoestimatesthevaluefunction Qw(st,at) ≈
Q(st,at) utilizing a parameterized vector w and
a policy assessment technique such as temporal-
diﬀerence learning [15].
AlMahamid & Grolinger:Preprint submitted to Elsevier Page 14 of 24

===== PAGE 15 =====

Autonomous UAV Navigation using RL: A Systematic Review
The actor can be thought of as a network that is at-
tempting to discover the probability of all possible actions
and perform the one with the largest probability, whereas
the critic can be thought of as a network that is evaluating
the chosen action by assessing the quality of the new state
created by the performed action. Numerous algorithms can
be classiﬁed under the actor-critic category including De-
terministicpolicygradients(DPG)[15],DeepDeterministic
Policy Gradient (DDPG) [136], Twin Delayed Deep Deter-
ministic (TD3) [137], and many others.
Deterministic Policy Gradients (DPG)
Deterministicpolicygradients(DPG)algorithmsimplement
a deterministic policy(s) instead of a stochastic policy
(s,a ). The deterministic policy is a subset of a stochastic
policy in which the target policy objective function is av-
eraged over the state distribution of the behavior policy, as
depict in 14 [15].
J() = ÊS
(s)V(s)ds
= ÊS
(s)Q(s,(s))ds
(14)
Importance sampling is frequently used in oﬀ-policy
techniques with a stochastic policy to account for mis-
matches between behavior and target policies. The deter-
ministicpolicygradienteliminatestheintegraloveractions;
therefore,theimportancesamplingcanbeskipped,resulting
in the following gradient [11]:
∇J() ≈ ÊS
(s) ∇(aðs)Q(s,(s))ds
= Es∼

∇(s)∇aQ(s,a )ða=(s)
 (15)
Numerous strategies are employed to enhance DPG; for
example, Experience Replay (ER) can be used in conjunc-
tionwithDPGtoincreasethestabilityandeﬃciencyofdata
[135]. Deep Deterministic Policy Gradient (DDPG) [136],
on the other hand, expands DPG by leveraging DQN to
operate in continuous action space whereas Twin Delayed
Deep Deterministic (TD3) [137] expands on DDPG by uti-
lizing Double DQN to prevent the overestimation of the
valuefunctionbytakingtheminimumvaluebetweenthetwo
critics [137].
Recurrent Deterministic Policy Gradients (RDPG)
Wierstraetal. [156]appliedRNNtoPolicyGradient(PG)to
build a model-free RL - namely Recurrent Policy Gradient
(RPG), for Partially Observable Markov Decision Problem
(POMDP), which does not require the agent to have a com-
plete assumption about the environment [156]. RPG applies
amethodforbackpropagatingreturn-weightedcharacteristic
eligibilities through time to approximate a policy gradient
for a recurrent neural network [156].
Recurrent Deterministic Policy Gradient (RDPG) [135]
implements DPG using RNN and extends the work of RGP
[156] to partially observed domains. The RNN with LSTM
cells preserves information about past observations over
many time steps.
Soft Actor-Critic (SAC)
TheobjectiveofSoftActor-Critic(SAC)istomaximizean-
ticipatedrewardandtheentropy[138].Byaddingtheantic-
ipatedentropyofthepolicyacross (st),SACimprovesthe
maximumsumofrewardsestablishedbyaddingtherewards
over states transitions J () = ∑T
t=1 Es∼,a∼

r(st,at)

[138]. Equation 16 illustrates an extended entropy goal, in
which the temperature parameter inﬂuences the stochas-
ticity of the optimum policy by specifying the importance
of the entropy((.ðst))term to the reward [138].
J () =
TÉ
t=1
Es∼,a∼

r(st,at) +((.ðst))

(16)
By using function approximators and two independent
NNsfortheactorandcritic,SACestimatesasoftQ-function
Q(st,at)parameterizedby ,astatevaluefunction V (st)
parameterized by  , and an adjustable policy (atðst)
parameterized by[11].
6.3.3. Multi-Agent and Distributed Actor-Critic
This group of algorithms includes multi-agent and dis-
tributed actor-critic algorithms. They are grouped together
asmulti-agentscanbedeployedacrossseveralnodesmaking
it a distributed system.
Advantage Actor-Critic
Asynchronous Advantage Actor-Critic (A3C)[140] is a
policy gradient algorithm that parallelizes training by using
multi-threads, commonly known as workers or agents. Each
agent has a local policy (atðst) and a value function
estimateV(st). The agent and the same-structured global
network asynchronously exchange the parameters in both
directions, from agent to the global network and vice-versa.
Aftertmax actionsorwhenaﬁnalstateisreached,thepolicy
and the value function are modiﬁed [140].
Advantage Actor-Critic (A2C)[140] is a policy gradient
method identical to A3C, except that it includes a coordi-
natorforsynchronizingallagents.Afterallagentscomplete
theirwork,eitherbyarrivingataﬁnalstateorbycompleting
tmax actions, the coordinator updates the policy and value
functioninbothdirectionsbetweentheagentsandtheglobal
network and vice versa.
AnothervariantofA3Cis Actor-CriticwithKronecker-
FactoredTrustRegion(ACKTR) [145]whichusesKronecker-
factoredapproximationcurvature(K-FAC)[157]tooptimize
the actor and critic. It improves the computation of natural
gradients by eﬃciently inverting the gradient covariance
matrix.
Actor-Critic with Experience Replay (ACER)
Actor-Critic with Experience Replay (ACER) [143] is an
oﬀ-policy actor-critic algorithm with experience replay that
AlMahamid & Grolinger:Preprint submitted to Elsevier Page 15 of 24

===== PAGE 16 =====

Autonomous UAV Navigation using RL: A Systematic Review
estimates the policy(atðst)and the value functionV
v
(st)
using a single deep neural network [143]. In comparison to
A3C, ACER employs a stochastic dueling network and a
noveltrust region policy optimization[143], while improv-
ing importance sampling with a bias correction [140].
ACER applies an improved Retrace algorithm [158] by
using a truncated importance sampling with bias correction
and the valueQret as the target value to train the critic
[143]. The gradient̂gacer
t is determined by truncating the
importanceweightsbyaconstant c,andsubtracting Vv (st),
which reduces variance.
Retrace-Actor(Reactor) [144]increasessamplingandtime
eﬃciency by combining contributions from diﬀerent tech-
niques. It employs Distributional Retrace [158] to provide
multi-step oﬀ-policy distributional RL updates while prior-
itizing replay on transitions [144]. Additionally, by taking
advantage of action values as a baseline, Reactor improves
the trade-oﬀ between variance and bias via-leave-one-out
(-LOO)resultinginanimprovementofthepolicygradient
[144].
Multi-Agent Reinforcement Learning (MARL)
DistributedDistributionalDDPG(D4PG) [139]addsfea-
turessuchasN-stepreturnsandprioritizedexperiencereplay
tothedistributedsettingsofDDPG[139].Ontheotherhand,
Multi-Agent DDPG (MADDPG) [146] expands DDPG to
coordinatebetweenmultipleagentsandlearnpolicieswhile
consideringeachagent’spolicy[146].Incomparison,Multi-
Agent TD3 (MATD3) expands TD3 [147] to work with
multi-agents using centralized training and decentralized
execution while,similarly to TD3, controlling the overesti-
mation bias by employing two centralized critics for each
agent.
Importance Weighted Actor-Learner Architecture (IM-
PALA)[149]isanoﬀ-policyalgorithmthatseparatesaction
execution and policy learning. It can be applied using two
distinct conﬁgurations: 1) a single learner and multiple ac-
tors,or2)multiplesynchronouslearnersandmultipleactors.
Usingasinglelearnerandseveralactors,thetrajectories
generatedbytheactorsaretransferredtothelearner.Before
initiating a new trajectory, the actors are waiting for the
learnertoupdatethepolicy,whilethelearnersimultaneously
queues the received trajectories from the actors and con-
structs the updated policy. Nonetheless, actors may acquire
anolderversionduetotheirlackofawarenessofoneanother
and the lag between the actors and the learner. To address
thischallenge,IMPALAemploysauniquev-tracecorrection
approach that takes into account a truncated importance
sampling (IS), deﬁned as the ratio of the learner’s policy
to the actor’s present policy[11]. Likewise, with multiple
synchronous learners, policy parameters are spread across
numerous learners who communicate synchronously via a
master learner [149].
Scalable, Eﬃcient Deep-RL (SEED RL)[150] provides
a scalable architecture that combines IMPALA with R2D2
and can train on millions of frames per second with a lower
cost of experiments compared to IMPALA [150]. SEED
moves the inference to the learner while the environments
runremotely,introducingalatencyissueduetotheincreased
number of remote calls, which is mitigated using a fast
communication layer using gRPC.
7. Problem Formulation and Algorithm
Selection
The previous section categorized RL algorithms based
on state and action types and reviewed the most prominent
algorithms. With such a large number of algorithms, it is
challengingtoselecttheRLalgorithmssuitabletotacklethe
task at hand. Consequently, Figure 11 depicts the process
of selecting a suitable RL algorithm or a group of RL
algorithms through six steps/questions that are answered to
guide an informed selection.
The selection process places a greater emphasis on how
the environment and RL objective are formulated than on
the RL problem type because the algorithm selection is
dependent on the environment and objective formulation.
For instance, UAV navigation tasks can employ several sets
of algorithms dependent on the desired action type. The
six steps, indicated in Figure 11, guide the selection of
algorithms:theselectedoptionateachsteplimitsthechoices
available in the next step based on the available algorithms’
characteristics. The steps are as follows:
• Step 1 - Deﬁne State Type:When assessing an RL task,
it is essential to comprehend the state that can be obtained
from the surrounding environment. For instance, some nav-
igation tasks simplify the environment’s states using grid-
cell representations [68, 73, 93], where the agent has a
limited and predetermined set of states, whereas in other
tasks,theenvironmentcanhaveunlimitedstates[34,38,40].
Therefore,thisstepsinvolvesadecisionbetweenlimitedvs.
unlimited states.
• Step2-DeﬁneActionType: Choosingbetweendiscrete
and continuous action types limits the number of applicable
algorithms. For instance, discrete actions can be used to
move the UAV in pre-speciﬁed directions (UP, DOWN,
RIGHT, LEFT, etc.), whereas continuous actions, such as
thechangeinpitch,roll,andyawangles,specifythequantity
of the movement using a real numberr ∈ ℝ.
• Step3-DeﬁnePolicyType: Asaddressedandexplained
in Subsection 3.4, RL algorithms can be either oﬀ-policy or
on-policy algorithms. The policy type selected restricts the
alternatives accessible in the subsequent stage. On-policy
algorithms converge faster than oﬀ-policy algorithms and
ﬁnd a sub-optimal policy, making them a good ﬁt for envi-
ronments requiring much exploration. Moreover, on-policy
algorithms provide stable training since one policy uses
learning and data sampling. On the other hand, oﬀ-policy
algorithms provide an optimal policy and require a good
exploration strategy.
Theoﬀ-policyalgorithms’convergencecanbeimproved
using techniques such asprioritized experience replayand
importancesampling,makingthemagoodﬁtfornavigation
tasks that require ﬁnding the optimal path.
AlMahamid & Grolinger:Preprint submitted to Elsevier Page 16 of 24

===== PAGE 17 =====

Autonomous UAV Navigation using RL: A Systematic Review
• Step 4 - Deﬁne Processing Type:While some RL algo-
rithmsruninasinglethread,otherssupportmulti-threading
and distributed processing. This steps select the processing
type that suits the application needs and the available com-
putational power.
• Step 5 - Deﬁne Number of Agents:This steps speciﬁes
the number of agents the application should have. This is
needed as someRL algorithms enable MARL, whichaccel-
erates learning but requires more computational resources,
while other techniques only employ a single agent.
• Step 6 - Select the Algorithms:The last phase of the
process results in a collection of algorithms that may be
applied to the RL problem at hand. However, the perfor-
mance of the algorithms is aﬀected by a number of fac-
tors and may vary depending on variables such as hyper-
parameter settings, reward engineering, and the agent’s NN
architecture. Consequently, the procedure seeks to reduce
the algorithm selection to a group of algorithms rather than
a single algorithm.
While this section presented the process of narrowing
down the algorithm for use case, Section 6 provided a
description and references to many algorithms to assist in
comprehending the distinctions between the algorithms and
making an informed selection.
8. Challenges and Opportunities
Previous sections demonstrated the diversity of UAV
navigation tasks besides the diversity of RL algorithms.
Due to such a high number of algorithms, selecting the
appropriate algorithms for the task at hand is challenging.
Table 3 and discussion in Section 6 provide an overview of
the RL algorithms and assist in selecting the RL algorithm
for navigation task. Nevertheless, there are still numerous
challenges and opportunities in RL for UAV navigation,
including:
Evaluationandbenchmarking: Atari2600isahomevideo
gameconsolewith57built-ingamesthatlaidthefoundation
to establish a benchmarking for RL algorithms. The bench-
mark was established using 57 diﬀerent games to compare
variousRLalgorithmsandsetabenchmarkbaselineagainst
human performance playing the same games. The agent’s
performance is evaluated and compared to other algorithms
using the same benchmark (Atari 2600), or evaluated us-
ing various non-navigation environments other than Atari
2600 [159]. The performance of the algorithms using the
benchmarkmightdiﬀerwhenappliedtotheUAVnavigation
simulated on a 3D environment or the real world because
the games in Atari 2600 can provide a full state of the
environment, which means the agent does not need to make
assumptions about the state, and MDP can be applied to
theseproblems.WhereasinUAVnavigationsimulation,the
agentknowspartialstatesoftheenvironment(observation),
theseobservationsareusedtotraintheagentusingPOMDP,
which results in changing behavior for some of the algo-
rithms. Furthermore, images processed from the games are
2Dimages,wheretheagentinmostalgorithmstriestolearn
an optimal policy based on the pattern of the pixels in the
image. The same cannot be inferred for images received
from the 3D simulators or the real-world images because
objects’ depth plays a vital role in learning the optimal
policyavoidingnearbyobjects.Therefore,thereisaneedfor
new evaluation and benchmarking techniques for RL driven
navigation.
Environment complexity: The tendency to oversimplify
the environment and the absence of a standardized bench-
markingtoolsmakesitimpossibletocompareandconclude
performances obtained using diﬀerent algorithms and sim-
ulated using various tools and environments. Nevertheless,
the UAV needs to perform tasks in diﬀerent environments
and is subject to various conditions, for example:
• Navigating in various environment types such as in-
door vs. outdoor.
• Considering the changing environment conditions
such as wind speed, lighting conditions, and moving
objects.
Some of the simulation tools discussed in Section 5,
such as AirSim combined with Unreal Engine, provide dif-
ferent environment types out-of-the-box and are capable of
simulating several environmental eﬀects such as changing
wind speed and lighting conditions. Still, these complex en-
vironments remain to be combined with new benchmarking
techniques for improved comparison of RL algorithms for
UAV navigation.
Knowledge transfer:Knowledge transfer imposes another
challenge, where the RL agent training in a selected envi-
ronment does not guarantee similar performance in another
environment due to the diﬀerence in environments’ nature
suchasdiﬀerentobject/obstaclestypes,backgroundtexture,
lighting density, and added noise. Most of the existing re-
search focused on applying transfer learning to reduce the
training time for the agent in the new environment [40].
However, generalized training methods or other techniques
are needed to guarantee a similar performance of the agent
in diﬀerent environments and under various conditions.
UAVs complexity:Training UAVs is often accomplished
in a 3D virtual environment since UAVs have limited com-
putational resources and power supply, with a typical ﬂight
time of 10 to 30 minutes. Reducing the computation time
will create possibilities for more complex navigation tasks
and increase the ﬂight time since it will reduce energy
consumption. Figure 6 shows that only10% of the inves-
tigated research used real drones for navigation training.
Therefore, more research is required to focus on energy-
aware navigation utilizing low-complexity and eﬃcient RL
algorithms while simulating using real drones.
Algorithm diversity:As seen from Table 3, many recent
and very successful algorithms have not been applied in
UAV navigation. As these algorithms have shown great
surcease in other domains outperforming the human bench-
mark, there is a prodigious potential in their application
in UAV navigation. The algorithms are expected to gain
bettergeneralizationondiﬀerentenvironments,speedupthe
AlMahamid & Grolinger:Preprint submitted to Elsevier Page 17 of 24

===== PAGE 18 =====

Autonomous UAV Navigation using RL: A Systematic Review
Figure 11:Algorithm Selection Process
AlMahamid & Grolinger:Preprint submitted to Elsevier Page 18 of 24

===== PAGE 19 =====

Autonomous UAV Navigation using RL: A Systematic Review
training process, and even solve eﬃciently more complex
tasks such as UAVs ﬂocking.
9. Conclusion
This review deliberates on the application of RL for
autonomous UAV navigation. RL uses an intelligent agent
tocontroltheUAVmovementbyprocessingthestatesfrom
the environment and moving the UAV in desired directions.
The data received from the UAV camera or other sensors
suchasLiDARareusedtoestimatethedistancefromvarious
objects in the environment and avoid colliding with these
objects.
RL algorithms and techniques were used to solve navi-
gationproblemssuchascontrollingtheUAVwhileavoiding
obstacles, path planning, and ﬂocking. For example, RL is
used in single UAV path planning and multi-UAVs ﬂocking
to plan path waypoints of the UAV(s) while avoiding obsta-
clesormaintainingﬂightformation(ﬂocking).Furthermore,
this study recognizes various navigation frameworks simu-
lation software used to conduct the experiments along with
identifying their use within the reviewed papers.
The review discusses over ﬁfty RL algorithms, explains
theircontributionsandrelations,andclassiﬁesthemaccord-
ingtotheapplicationenvironmentandtheiruseinUAVnav-
igation. Furthermore, the study highlights other algorithmic
traits such as multi-threading, distributed processing, and
multi-agents, followed by a systematic process that aims to
assist in ﬁnding the set of applicable algorithms.
The study observes that the research community tends
to experiment with a speciﬁc set of algorithms: Q-learning,
DQN, Double DQN, DDPG, PPO, although some recent
algorithmsshowmorepromisingresultsthanthementioned
algorithms such as agent57. To the best of the authors’
knowledge, this study is the ﬁrst systematic review identi-
fying a large number of RL algorithms while focusing on
their application in autonomous UAV navigation.
Analysis of the current RL algorithms and their use
in UAV navigation identiﬁed the following challenges and
opportunities: the need for navigation-focused evaluation
and benchmarking techniques, the necessity to work with
more complex environments, the need to examine knowl-
edge transfer, the complexity of UAVs, and the necessity to
evaluate state-of-the-art RL algorithms on navigation tasks.
A. Acronyms
• A2C :Advantage Actor-Critic
• A3C :Asynchronous Advantage Actor-Critic
• AC :Actor-Critic
• ACE :Actor Ensemble
• ACER :Actor-Critic with Experience Replay
• ACKTR : Actor-Critic using Kronecker-Factored
Trust Region
• Agent57 :Agent57
• Ape-X DPG :Ape-X Deterministic Policy Gradients
• Ape-X DQN :Ape-X Deep Q-Networks
• AS :Autonomous Systems
• C51-DQN :Categorical Deep Q-Networks
• CNN :Recurrent Neural Network
• D4PG :Distributed Distributional DDPG
• DAC :Double Actor-Critic
• DD-DQN :Double Dueling Deep Q-Networks
• DD-DRQN : Double Dueling Deep Recurrent Q-
Networks
• DDPG :Deep Deterministic Policy Gradient
• Double DQN :Double Deep Q-Networks
• DPG :Deterministic Policy Gradients
• DPPO :Distributed Proximal Policy Optimization
• DQN :Deep Q-Networks
• DRL :Deep Reinforcement Learning
• DRQN :Deep Recurrent Q-Networks
• Dueling DQN :Dueling Deep Q-Networks
• DVS :Dynamic Vision Sensor
• eNVM :embedded Non-Volatile Memory
• FOV :Field Of View
• FQF :Fully parameterized Quantile Function
• GPS :Global Positioning System
• IMPALA :Importance Weighted Actor-Learner Ar-
chitecture
• IMU :Inertial Measurement Unit
• IQN :Implicit Quantile Networks
• K-FAC:Kronecker-factoredapproximationcurvature
• KL :Kullback-Leibler
• LSTM :Long-Short Term Memory
• MAAC :Multi-Actor-Attention-Critic
• MADDPG :Multi-Agent DDPG
• MARL :Multi-Agent Reinforcement Learning
• MATD3 : Multi-Agent Twin Delayed Deep Deter-
ministic
• MATD3 :Multi-Agent TD3
• MDP :Markov Decision Problem
• NGA :Never Give Up
• Noisy DQN :Noisy Deep Q-Networks
• PAAC :Parallel Advantage Actor-Critic
• PER :Prioritized Experience Replay
• PG :Policy Gradients
• POMDP : Partially Observable Markov Decision
Problem
• PPG :Phasic Policy Gradient
• PPO :Proximal Policy Optimization
• QR-DQN :Quantile Regression Deep Q-Networks
• R2D2: RecurrentReplayDistributedDeepQ-Networks
• Rainbow DQN :Rainbow Deep Q-Networks
• RDPG :Recurrent Deterministic Policy Gradients
• Reactor :Retrace-Actor
• REINFORCE : REward Increment = Nonnegative
Factor ×OﬀsetReinforcement ×CharacteristicEligibility
• RL :Reinforcement Learning
• RND :Random Network Distillation
• RNN :Recurrent Neural Network
• ROS :Robot Operating System
• SAC :Soft Actor-Critic
• SARSA :State-Action-Reward-State-Action
• SEED RL :Scalable, Eﬃcient Deep-RL
AlMahamid & Grolinger:Preprint submitted to Elsevier Page 19 of 24

===== PAGE 20 =====

Autonomous UAV Navigation using RL: A Systematic Review
• SLAC :Stochastic Latent Actor-Critic
• SRAM :Static Random Access Memory
• SVPG :Stein Variational Policy Gradient
• TD :Temporal Diﬀerence
• TD3 :Twin Delayed Deep Deterministic
• TRPO :Trust Region Policy Optimization
• UAV :Unmanned Aerial Vehicle
• UBC :Upper Conﬁdence Bound
• UGV :Unmanned Ground Vehicle
• UVFA :Universal Value Function Approximator
CRediT authorship contribution statement
Fadi AlMahamid: Conceptualization, Methodology,
Investigation, Formal Analysis, Validation, Writing - Origi-
nalDraft,Writing-Review&Editing. KatarinaGrolinger:
Supervision,Writing-Review&Editing,FundingAcquisi-
tion.
Acknowledgments
This research has been supported by NSERC under grant
RGPIN-2018-06222
References
[1] Y. Lu, Z. Xue, G.-S. Xia, L. Zhang, A survey on vision-based UAV
navigation,Taylor&FrancisGeo-spatialinformationscience21(1)
(2018) 21–32. doi:10.1080/10095020.2017.1420509.
[2] F. Zeng, C. Wang, S. S. Ge, A survey on visual navigation for
artiﬁcial agents with deep reinforcement learning, IEEE Access 8
(2020) 135426–135442.
[3] R. Azoulay, Y. Haddad, S. Reches, Machine Learning Methods for
UAVFlocksManagement-ASurvey,IEEEAccess9(2021)139146–
139175.
[4] S. Aggarwal, N. Kumar, Path planning techniques for unmanned
aerialvehicles:Areview,solutions,andchallenges,ComputerCom-
munications 149 (2020) 270–299.
[5] W. Lou, X. Guo, Adaptive trajectory tracking control using rein-
forcement learning for quadrotor, SAGE International Journal of
Advanced Robotic Systems 13 (1) (2016).doi:10.5772/62128.
[6] A. Guerra, F. Guidi, D. Dardari, P. M. Djuri/uni0107, Networks of UAVs
of low-complexity for time-critical localization, arXiv preprint
arXiv:2108.13181 (2021).
[7] A. Guerra, F. Guidi, D. Dardari, P. M. Djuri/uni0107, Real-Time Learning
for THZ Radar Mapping and UAV Control, in: IEEE International
Conference on Autonomous Systems, 2021, pp. 1–5.doi:10.1109/
ICAS49788.2021.9551141.
[8] A. Guerra, D. Dardari, P. M. Djuri/uni0107, Dynamic radar network of
UAVs: A joint navigation and tracking approach, IEEE Access 8
(2020) 116454–116469.
[9] Y. Liu, Y. Wang, J. Wang, Y. Shen, Distributed 3D relative local-
ization of UAVs, IEEE Transactions on Vehicular Technology 69
(2020) 11756–11770.
[10] S. Zhang, R. Pöhlmann, T. Wiedemann, A. Dammann, H. Wymeer-
sch, P. A. Hoeher, Self-aware swarm navigation in autonomous
explorationmissions,ProceedingsoftheIEEE108(7)(2020)1168–
1195.
[11] F. AlMahamid, K. Grolinger, Reinforcement Learning Algorithms:
An Overview and Classiﬁcation, in: IEEE Canadian Conference on
Electrical and Computer Engineering, 2021, pp. 1–7.
[12] R.S.Sutton,A.G.Barto,ReinforcementLearning:AnIntroduction,
MIT Press, 2018.
[13] L.-J. Lin, Self-improving reactive agents based on reinforcement
learning, planning and teaching, Springer Machine learning 8 (3-4)
(1992) 293–321.
[14] T. Schaul, J. Quan, I. Antonoglou, D. Silver, Prioritized experience
replay, arXiv:1511.05952 (2015).
[15] D.Silver,G.Lever,N.Heess,T.Degris,D.Wierstra,M.Riedmiller,
Deterministic Policy Gradient Algorithms, in: PMLR International
conference on machine learning, 2014, pp. 387–395.
[16] S. Zhou, B. Li, C. Ding, L. Lu, C. Ding, An Eﬃcient Deep Rein-
forcement Learning Framework for UAVs, in: IEEE International
Symposium on Quality Electronic Design, 2020, pp. 323–328.
[17] P.Karthik,K.Kumar,V.Fernandes,K.Arya,ReinforcementLearn-
ing for Altitude Hold and Path Planning in a Quadcopter, in: IEEE
International Conference on Control, Automation and Robotics,
2020, pp. 463–467.
[18] A. M. Deshpande, R. Kumar, A. A. Minai, M. Kumar, Develop-
mental reinforcement learning of control policy of a quadcopter
UAV with thrust vectoring rotors, in: ASME Dynamic Systems and
Control Conference, Vol. 84287, 2020, p. V002T36A011. doi:
10.1115/DSCC2020-3319.
[19] E.Camci,E.Kayacan,Learningmotionprimitivesforplanningswift
maneuversofquadrotor,SpringerAutonomousRobots43(7)(2019)
1733–1745.
[20] S.Li,P.Durdevic,Z.Yang,OptimalTrackingControlBasedonInte-
gral Reinforcement Learning for An Underactuated Drone, Elsevier
IFAC-PapersOnLine 52 (8) (2019) 194–199.
[21] C. Greatwood, A. G. Richards, Reinforcement learning and model
predictive control for robust embedded quadrotor guidance and
control, Springer Autonomous Robots 43 (7) (2019) 1681–1693.
[22] W. Koch, R. Mancuso, R. West, A. Bestavros, Reinforcement learn-
ing for UAV attitude control, ACM Transactions on Cyber-Physical
Systems 3 (2) (2019) 1–21.
[23] N. Salvatore, S. Mian, C. Abidi, A. D. George, A Neuro-Inspired
Approach to Intelligent Collision Avoidance and Navigation, in:
IEEE Digital Avionics Systems Conference, 2020, pp. 1–9.
[24] O.Bouhamed,H.Ghazzai,H.Besbes,Y.Massoud,AUAV-Assisted
Data Collection for Wireless Sensor Networks: Autonomous Navi-
gation and Scheduling, IEEE Access 8 (2020) 110446–110460.
[25] H. Huang, J. Gu, Q. Wang, Y. Zhuang, An Autonomous UAV
Navigation System for Unknown Flight Environment, in: IEEE
International Conference on Mobile Ad-Hoc and Sensor Networks,
2019, pp. 63–68.
[26] S.-Y. Shin, Y.-W. Kang, Y.-G. Kim, Automatic Drone Navigation in
Realistic 3D Landscapes using Deep Reinforcement Learning, in:
IEEE International Conference on Control, Decision and Informa-
tion Technologies, 2019, pp. 1072–1077.
[27] C. Wang, J. Wang, X. Zhang, X. Zhang, Autonomous Navigation
of UAV in Large-Scale Unknown Complex Environment with Deep
ReinforcementLearning,in:IEEEGlobalConferenceonSignaland
Information Processing, 2017, pp. 858–862.
[28] C. Wang, J. Wang, Y. Shen, X. Zhang, Autonomous Navigation of
UAVs in Large-Scale Complex Environments: A Deep Reinforce-
mentLearningApproach,IEEETransactionsonVehicularTechnol-
ogy 68 (3) (2019) 2124–2136.
[29] A. Anwar, A. Raychowdhury, Autonomous Navigation via Deep
Reinforcement Learning for Resource Constraint Edge Nodes using
Transfer Learning, IEEE Access 8 (2020) 26549–26560.
[30] O. Bouhamed, H. Ghazzai, H. Besbes, Y. Massoud, Autonomous
UAV Navigation: A DDPG-Based Deep Reinforcement Learning
Approach, in: IEEE International Symposium on Circuits and Sys-
tems, 2020, pp. 1–5.
[31] Y. Yang, K. Zhang, D. Liu, H. Song, Autonomous UAV Navigation
inDynamicEnvironmentswithDoubleDeepQ-Networks,in:IEEE
Digital Avionics Systems Conference, 2020, pp. 1–7.
[32] Y. Li, M. Li, A. Sanyal, Y. Wang, Q. Qiu, Autonomous UAV with
Learned Trajectory Generation and Control, in: IEEE International
Workshop on Signal Processing Systems, 2019, pp. 115–120.
AlMahamid & Grolinger:Preprint submitted to Elsevier Page 20 of 24

===== PAGE 21 =====

Autonomous UAV Navigation using RL: A Systematic Review
[33] Y.Chen,N.González-Prelcic,R.W.Heath,Collision-freeUAVnav-
igationwithamonocularcamerausingdeepreinforcementlearning,
in: IEEE International Workshop on Machine Learning for Signal
Processing, 2020, pp. 1–6.
[34] R. B. Grando, J. C. de Jesus, P. L. Drews-Jr, Deep Reinforcement
Learning for Mapless Navigation of Unmanned Aerial Vehicles, in:
IEEE Latin American Robotics Symposium, Brazilian Symposium
onRoboticsandWorkshoponRoboticsinEducation,2020,pp.1–6.
[35] E. Camci, D. Campolo, E. Kayacan, Deep Reinforcement Learning
forMotionPlanningofQuadrotorsUsingRawDepthImages,Learn-
ing (RL) 10 (2020).
[36] C. Wang, J. Wang, J. Wang, X. Zhang, Deep-Reinforcement-
Learning-Based Autonomous UAV Navigation With Sparse Re-
wards, IEEE Internet of Things Journal 7 (7) (2020) 6180–6190.
[37] E. Cetin, C. Barrado, G. Muñoz, M. Macias, E. Pastor, Drone
navigation and avoidance of obstacles through deep reinforcement
learning, in: IEEE Digital Avionics Systems Conference, 2019, pp.
1–7.
[38] S. D. Morad, R. Mecca, R. P. Poudel, S. Liwicki, R. Cipolla,
Embodied Visual Navigation with Automatic Curriculum Learning
in Real Environments, IEEE Robotics and Automation Letters 6 (2)
(2021) 683–690.
[39] P.Yan,C.Bai,H.Zheng,J.Guo,FlockingControlofUAVSwarms
with Deep Reinforcement Learning Approach, in: IEEE Interna-
tional Conference on Unmanned Systems, 2020, pp. 592–599.
[40] I. Yoon, M. A. Anwar, R. V. Joshi, T. Rakshit, A. Raychowdhury,
Hierarchical memory system with STT-MRAM and SRAM to sup-
port transfer and real-time reinforcement learning in autonomous
drones, IEEE Journal on Emerging and Selected Topics in Circuits
and Systems 9 (3) (2019) 485–497.
[41] G. Williams, N. Wagener, B. Goldfain, P. Drews, J. M. Rehg,
B. Boots, E. A. Theodorou, Information theoretic MPC for model-
based reinforcement learning, in: IEEE International Conference on
Robotics and Automation, 2017, pp. 1714–1721.
[42] L. He, N. Aouf, J. F. Whidborne, B. Song, Integrated moment-
based LGMD and deep reinforcement learning for UAV obstacle
avoidance, in: IEEE International Conference on Robotics and Au-
tomation, 2020, pp. 7491–7497.
[43] A. Singla, S. Padakandla, S. Bhatnagar, Memory-based deep re-
inforcement learning for obstacle avoidance in UAV with limited
environment knowledge, IEEE Transactions on Intelligent Trans-
portation Systems (2019).
[44] T.-C. Wu, S.-Y. Tseng, C.-F. Lai, C.-Y. Ho, Y.-H. Lai, Navigating
assistance system for quadcopter with deep reinforcement learning,
in: IEEE International Cognitive Cities Conference, 2018, pp. 16–
19.
[45] M. A. Anwar, A. Raychowdhury, NavREn-Rl: Learning to ﬂy in
real environment via end-to-end deep reinforcement learning using
monocular images, in: IEEE International Conference on Mecha-
tronics and Machine Vision in Practice, 2018, pp. 1–6.
[46] B. Zhou, W. Wang, Z. Wang, B. Ding, Neural Q-learning algorithm
based UAV obstacle avoidance, in: IEEE CSAA Guidance, Naviga-
tion and Control Conference, 2018, pp. 1–6.
[47] Z. Yijing, Z. Zheng, Z. Xiaoyi, L. Yang, Q-learning algorithm
basedUAVpathlearningandobstacleavoidanceapproach,in:IEEE
Chinese Control Conference, 2017, pp. 3397–3402.
[48] A.Villanueva,A.Fajardo,DeepReinforcementLearningwithNoise
InjectionforUAVPathPlanning,in:IEEEInternationalConference
on Engineering Technologies and Applied Sciences, 2019, pp. 1–6.
[49] A. Walvekar, Y. Goel, A. Jain, S. Chakrabarty, A. Kumar, Vision
based autonomous navigation of quadcopter using reinforcement
learning, in: IEEE International Conference on Automation, Elec-
tronics and Electrical Engineering, 2019, pp. 160–165.
[50] B. Zhou, W. Wang, Z. Liu, J. Wang, Vision-based Navigation of
UAV with Continuous Action Space Using Deep Reinforcement
Learning, in: IEEE Chinese Control And Decision Conference,
2019, pp. 5030–5035.
[51] M. Hasanzade, E. Koyuncu, A Dynamically Feasible Fast Replan-
ning Strategy with Deep Reinforcement Learning, Springer Journal
of Intelligent & Robotic Systems 101 (1) (2021) 1–17.
[52] G. Muñoz, C. Barrado, E. Çetin, E. Salami, Deep reinforcement
learningfordronedelivery,MDPIDrones3(3)(2019). doi:10.3390/
drones3030072.
[53] V.J.Hodge,R.Hawkins,R.Alexander,Deepreinforcementlearning
for drone navigation using sensor data, Springer Neural Computing
and Applications 33 (6) (2021) 2015–2033.
[54] O.Doukhi,D.-J.Lee,DeepReinforcementLearningforEnd-to-End
Local Motion Planning of Autonomous Aerial Robots in Unknown
Outdoor Environments: Real-Time Flight Experiments, MDPI Sen-
sors 21 (7) (2021) 2534.doi:10.3390/s21072534.
[55] V. A. Bakale, Y. K. VS, V. C. Roodagi, Y. N. Kulkarni, M. S. Patil,
S.Chickerur,IndoorNavigationwithDeepReinforcementLearning,
in: IEEE International Conference on Inventive Computation Tech-
nologies, 2020, pp. 660–665.
[56] C. J. Maxey, E. J. Shamwell, Navigation and collision avoidance
with human augmented supervisory training and ﬁne tuning via re-
inforcementlearning,in:SPIEMicro-andNanotechnologySensors,
Systems, and Applications XI, Vol. 10982, 2019, pp. 325 – 334.
doi:10.1117/12.2518551.
[57] Y. Zhao, J. Guo, C. Bai, H. Zheng, Reinforcement Learning-Based
Collision Avoidance Guidance Algorithm for Fixed-Wing UAVs,
Hindawi Complexity 2021 (2021).doi:10.1155/2021/8818013.
[58] G. Tong, N. Jiang, L. Biyue, Z. Xi, W. Ya, D. Wenbo, UAV naviga-
tion in high dynamic environments: A deep reinforcement learning
approach, Elsevier Chinese Journal of Aeronautics 34 (2) (2021)
479–489.
[59] O. Bouhamed, X. Wan, H. Ghazzai, Y. Massoud, A DDPG-
Based Approach for Energy-aware UAV Navigation in Obstacle-
constrained Environment, in: IEEE World Forum on Internet of
Things, 2020, pp. 1–6.
[60] O. Walker, F. Vanegas, F. Gonzalez, S. Koenig, A Deep Reinforce-
ment Learning Framework for UAV Navigation in Indoor Environ-
ments, in: IEEE Aerospace Conference, 2019, pp. 1–14.
[61] O. Bouhamed, H. Ghazzai, H. Besbes, Y. Massoud, A Generic
Spatiotemporal Scheduling for Autonomous UAVs: A Reinforce-
ment Learning-Based Approach, IEEE Open Journal of Vehicular
Technology 1 (2020) 93–106.
[62] J.Zhang,Z.Yu,S.Mao,S.C.Periaswamy,J.Patton,X.Xia,IADRL:
Imitation augmented deep reinforcement learning enabled UGV-
UAV coalition for tasking in complex environments, IEEE Access
8 (2020) 102335–102347.
[63] X.Yu,Y.Wu,X.-M.Sun,ANavigationSchemeforaRandomMaze
Using Reinforcement Learning with Quadrotor Vision, in: IEEE
European Control Conference, 2019, pp. 518–523.
[64] H. Li, S. Wu, P. Xie, Z. Qin, B. Zhang, A Path Planning for One
UAV Based on Geometric Algorithm, in: IEEE CSAA Guidance,
Navigation and Control Conference, 2018, pp. 1–5.
[65] D. Sacharny, T. C. Henderson, Optimal Policies in Complex Large-
scale UAS Traﬃc Management, in: IEEE International Conference
on Industrial Cyber Physical Systems, 2019, pp. 352–357.
[66] E. Camci, E. Kayacan, Planning swift maneuvers of quadcopter
using motion primitives explored by reinforcement learning, in:
IEEE American Control Conference, 2019, pp. 279–285.
[67] A. Guerra, F. Guidi, D. Dardari, P. M. Djuric, Reinforcement learn-
ing for UAV autonomous navigation, mapping and target detection,
in: ION Position, Location and Navigation Symposium, 2020, pp.
1004–1013.
[68] Z. Cui, Y. Wang, UAV Path Planning Based on Multi-Layer Re-
inforcement Learning Technique, IEEE Access 9 (2021) 59486–
59497.
[69] Z. Wang, H. Li, Z. Wu, H. Wu, A pretrained proximal policy
optimization algorithm with reward shaping for aircraft guidance to
a moving destination in three-dimensional continuous space, SAGE
International Journal of Advanced Robotic Systems 18 (1) (2021).
doi:10.1177/1729881421989546.
AlMahamid & Grolinger:Preprint submitted to Elsevier Page 21 of 24

===== PAGE 22 =====

Autonomous UAV Navigation using RL: A Systematic Review
[70] H. Eslamiat, Y. Li, N. Wang, A. K. Sanyal, Q. Qiu, Autonomous
waypoint planning, optimal trajectory generation and nonlinear
tracking control for multi-rotor UAVs, in: IEEE European Control
Conference, 2019, pp. 2695–2700.
[71] N.Imanberdiyev,C.Fu,E.Kayacan,I.-M.Chen,AutonomousNav-
igation of UAV by using Real-Time Model-Based Reinforcement
Learning,in:IEEEInternationalconferenceoncontrol,automation,
robotics and vision, 2016, pp. 1–6.
[72] S. F. Abedin, M. S. Munir, N. H. Tran, Z. Han, C. S. Hong, Data
freshnessandenergy-eﬃcientUAVnavigationoptimization:Adeep
reinforcement learning approach, IEEE Transactions on Intelligent
Transportation Systems (2020).
[73] W. Andrew, C. Greatwood, T. Burghardt, Deep learning for explo-
rationandrecoveryofunchartedanddynamictargetsfromUAV-like
vision,in:IEEERSJInternationalConferenceonIntelligentRobots
and Systems, 2018, pp. 1124–1131.
[74] H.X.Pham,H.M.La,D.Feil-Seifer,L.VanNguyen,Reinforcement
learning for autonomous UAV navigation using function approxi-
mation, in: IEEE International Symposium on Safety, Security, and
Rescue Robotics, 2018, pp. 1–6.
[75] S. Kulkarni, V. Chaphekar, M. M. U. Chowdhury, F. Erden, I. Gu-
venc, UAV aided search and rescue operation using reinforcement
learning, in: IEEE SoutheastCon, Vol. 2, 2020, pp. 1–8.
[76] A.Peake,J.McCalmon,Y.Zhang,B.Raiford,S.Alqahtani,Wilder-
ness search and rescue missions using deep reinforcement learning,
in: IEEE International Symposium on Safety, Security, and Rescue
Robotics, 2020, pp. 102–107.
[77] M. A. Akhlouﬁ, S. Arola, A. Bonnet, Drones chasing drones: Re-
inforcement learning and deep search area proposal, MDPI Drones
3 (3) (2019).doi:10.3390/drones3030058.
[78] R.Polvara,M.Patacchiola,S.Sharma,J.Wan,A.Manning,R.Sut-
ton, A. Cangelosi, Toward end-to-end control for UAV autonomous
landing via deep reinforcement learning, in: IEEE International
conference on unmanned aircraft systems, 2018, pp. 115–123.
[79] R.Polvara,S.Sharma,J.Wan,A.Manning,R.Sutton,Autonomous
Vehicular Landings on the Deck of an Unmanned Surface Vehicle
using Deep Reinforcement Learning, Cambridge Core Robotica
37 (11) (2019) 1867–1882.doi:10.1017/S0263574719000316.
[80] S. Lee, T. Shim, S. Kim, J. Park, K. Hong, H. Bang, Vision-
basedautonomouslandingofamulti-copterunmannedaerialvehicle
using reinforcement learning, in: IEEE International Conference on
Unmanned Aircraft Systems, 2018, pp. 108–114.
[81] C. Wang, J. Wang, X. Zhang, A Deep Reinforcement Learning
Approach to Flocking and Navigation of UAVs in Large-Scale
Complex Environments, in: IEEE Global Conference on Signal and
Information Processing, 2018, pp. 1228–1232.
[82] G. T. Lee, C. O. Kim, Autonomous Control of Combat Unmanned
Aerial Vehicles to Evade Surface-to-Air Missiles Using Deep Rein-
forcement Learning, IEEE Access 8 (2020) 226724–226736.
[83] Á. Madridano, A. Al-Kaﬀ, P. Flores, D. Martín, A. de la Escalera,
SoftwareArchitectureforAutonomousandCoordinatedNavigation
of UAV Swarms in Forest and Urban Fireﬁghting, MDPI Applied
Sciences 11 (3) (2021).doi:10.3390/app11031258.
[84] D.Wang,T.Fan,T.Han,J.Pan,ATwo-StageReinforcementLearn-
ing Approach for Multi-UAV Collision Avoidance Under Imperfect
Sensing,IEEERoboticsandAutomationLetters5(2)(2020)3098–
3105.
[85] J. Moon, S. Papaioannou, C. Laoudias, P. Kolios, S. Kim, Deep
Reinforcement Learning Multi-UAV Trajectory Control for Target
Tracking, IEEE Internet of Things Journal (2021).
[86] C.H.Liu,X.Ma,X.Gao,J.Tang,Distributedenergy-eﬃcientmulti-
UAV navigation for long-term communication coverage by deep
reinforcement learning, IEEE Transactions on Mobile Computing
19 (6) (2019) 1274–1285.
[87] S.Omi,H.-S.Shin,A.Tsourdos,J.Espeland,A.Buchi,Introduction
toUAVswarmutilizationforcommunicationonthemoveterminals
trackingevaluationwithreinforcementlearningtechnique,in:IEEE
European Conference on Antennas and Propagation, 2021, pp. 1–5.
[88] A.Viseras,M.Meissner,J.Marchal,WildﬁreFrontMonitoringwith
Multiple UAVs using Deep Q-Learning, IEEE Access (2021).
[89] A.Bonnet,M.A.Akhlouﬁ,UAVpursuitusingreinforcementlearn-
ing, in: SPIE Unmanned Systems Technology XXI, Vol. 11021,
International Society for Optics and Photonics, 2019, pp. 51 – 58.
doi:10.1117/12.2520310.
[90] S. Fan, G. Song, B. Yang, X. Jiang, Prioritized Experience Replay
in Multi-Actor-Attention-Critic for Reinforcement Learning, IOP-
science Journal of Physics: Conference Series 1631 (2020).doi:
10.1088/1742-6596/1631/1/012040.
[91] A. Majd, A. Ashraf, E. Troubitsyna, M. Daneshtalab, Integrating
learning, optimization, and prediction for eﬃcient navigation of
swarms of drones, in: IEEE Euromicro International Conference on
Parallel,DistributedandNetwork-basedProcessing,2018,pp.101–
108.
[92] A. Chapman, Drone Types: Multi-Rotor vs Fixed-Wing vs Sin-
gle Rotor vs Hybrid VTOL, https://www.auav.com.au/articles/
drone-types/, (Accessed: 01.11.2021) (2016).
[93] M.Elnaggar,N.Bezzo,AnIRLApproachforCyber-PhysicalAttack
Intention Prediction and Recovery, in: IEEE American Control
Conference, 2018, pp. 222–227.
[94] H. D. Escobar-Alvarez, N. Johnson, T. Hebble, K. Klingebiel, S. A.
Quintero, J. Regenstein, N. A. Browning, R-ADVANCE: Rapid
AdaptivePredictionforVision-basedAutonomousNavigation,Con-
trol,andEvasion,WOLJournalofFieldRobotics35(1)(2018)91–
100. doi:10.1002/rob.21744.
[95] C.W.Reynolds,Flocks,herdsandschools:Adistributedbehavioral
model, in: Proceedings of the 14th annual conference on Computer
graphics and interactive techniques, 1987, pp. 25–34.
[96] R. Olfati-Saber, Flocking for multi-agent dynamic systems: Algo-
rithms and theory, IEEE Transactions on automatic control 51 (3)
(2006) 401–420.
[97] H. M. La, W. Sheng, Flocking control of multiple agents in noisy
environments, in: IEEE International Conference on Robotics and
Automation, 2010, pp. 4964–4969.
[98] Y. Jia, J. Du, W. Zhang, L. Wang, Three-dimensional leaderless
ﬂocking control of large-scale small unmanned aerial vehicles, El-
sevier IFAC-PapersOnLine 50 (1) (2017) 6208–6213.
[99] H. Su, X. Wang, Z. Lin, Flocking of multi-agents with a virtual
leader, IEEE transactions on automatic control 54 (2) (2009) 293–
307.
[100] S. A. Quintero, G. E. Collins, J. P. Hespanha, Flocking with ﬁxed-
wing UAVs for distributed sensing: A stochastic optimal control
approach, in: IEEE American Control Conference, 2013, pp. 2025–
2031.
[101] S.-M. Hung, S. N. Givigi, A Q-learning approach to ﬂocking with
UAVsinastochasticenvironment,IEEEtransactionsoncybernetics
47 (1) (2016) 186–197.
[102] K.Morihiro,T.Isokawa,H.Nishimura,M.Tomimasu,N.Kamiura,
N. Matsui, Reinforcement Learning Scheme for Flocking Behavior
Emergence, Journal of Advanced Computational Intelligence and
Intelligent Informatics 11 (2) (2007) 155–161.
[103] Z.Xu,Y.Lyu,Q.Pan,J.Hu,C.Zhao,S.Liu,Multi-vehicleﬂocking
control with deep deterministic policy gradient method, in: IEEE
International Conference on Control and Automation, 2018, pp.
306–311.
[104] O. Robotics, ROS Home Page, https://www.ros.org/, (Accessed:
01.11.2021) (2021).
[105] M. Research, Microsoft AirSim Home Page, https://microsoft.
github.io/AirSim/, (Accessed: 01.11.2021) (2021).
[106] O. S. R. Foundation, Gazebo Home Page,https://gazebosim.org/,
(Accessed: 01.11.2021) (2021).
[107] E. Games, Epic Games Unreal Engine Home Page,https://www.
unrealengine.com, (Accessed: 01.11.2021) (2021).
[108] C.J.Watkins,P.Dayan,Q-learning,SpringerMachinelearning8(3-
4) (1992) 279–292.doi:10.1007/978-1-4615-3618-5_4 .
[109] A. Fotouhi, M. Ding, M. Hassan, Deep Q-Learning for Two-Hop
Communications of Drone Base Stations, MDPI Sensors 21 (6)
AlMahamid & Grolinger:Preprint submitted to Elsevier Page 22 of 24

===== PAGE 23 =====

Autonomous UAV Navigation using RL: A Systematic Review
(2021). doi:10.3390/s21061960.
[110] G.A.Rummery,M.Niranjan,On-lineQ-learningusingconnection-
ist systems, Vol. 37, University of Cambridge, 1994.
[111] V. Mnih, K. Kavukcuoglu, D. Silver, A. Graves, I. Antonoglou,
D.Wierstra,M.Riedmiller,PlayingAtariwithDeepReinforcement
Learning, arXiv:1312.5602 (2013).
[112] H. Huang, Y. Yang, H. Wang, Z. Ding, H. Sari, F. Adachi, Deep
reinforcementlearningforUAVnavigationthroughmassiveMIMO
technique, IEEE Transactions on Vehicular Technology 69 (1)
(2019) 1117–1121.
[113] H. Van Hasselt, A. Guez, D. Silver, Deep reinforcement learning
with double Q-Learning, AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelli-
gence (2016) 2094–2100.
[114] Z. Wang, T. Schaul, M. Hessel, H. Hasselt, M. Lanctot, N. Freitas,
Dueling Network Architectures for Deep Reinforcement Learning,
in: PMLR International Conference on Machine Learning, Vol. 48,
2016, pp. 1995–2003.
[115] M. Hausknecht, P. Stone, Deep Recurrent Q-learning for partially
observable MDPS, arXiv:1507.06527 (2015).
[116] M. Fortunato, M. G. Azar, B. Piot, J. Menick, I. Osband, A. Graves,
V.Mnih,R.Munos,D.Hassabis,O.Pietquin,etal.,Noisynetworks
for exploration, arXiv:1706.10295 (2017).
[117] M.G.Bellemare,W.Dabney,R.Munos,Adistributionalperspective
on reinforcement learning, in: PMLR International Conference on
Machine Learning, 2017, pp. 449–458.
[118] W.Dabney,M.Rowland,M.G.Bellemare,R.Munos,Distributional
reinforcement learning with quantile regression, AAAI Conference
on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (2018).
[119] W. Dabney, G. Ostrovski, D. Silver, R. Munos, Implicit quantile
networks for distributional reinforcement learning, in: PMLR Inter-
national conference on machine learning, 2018, pp. 1096–1105.
[120] M. Hessel, J. Modayil, H. Van Hasselt, T. Schaul, G. Ostrovski,
W. Dabney, D. Horgan, B. Piot, M. Azar, D. Silver, Rainbow:
Combining improvements in deep reinforcement learning, AAAI
Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (2018).
[121] D. Yang, L. Zhao, Z. Lin, T. Qin, J. Bian, T.-Y. Liu, Fully parame-
terized quantile function for distributional reinforcement learning,
Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems 32 (2019)
6193–6202.
[122] S. Kapturowski, G. Ostrovski, J. Quan, R. Munos, W. Dabney,
Recurrent experience replay in distributed reinforcement learning,
International Conference on Learning Representations (2018).
[123] D. Horgan, J. Quan, D. Budden, G. Barth-Maron, M. Hessel,
H. Van Hasselt, D. Silver, Distributed prioritized experience replay,
arXiv:1803.00933 (2018).
[124] A. P. Badia, P. Sprechmann, A. Vitvitskyi, D. Guo, B. Piot, S. Kap-
turowski,O.Tieleman,M.Arjovsky,A.Pritzel,A.Bolt,etal.,Never
giveup:Learningdirectedexplorationstrategies,arXiv:2002.06038
(2020).
[125] A. P. Badia, B. Piot, S. Kapturowski, P. Sprechmann, A. Vitvitskyi,
Z. D. Guo, C. Blundell, Agent57: Outperforming the atari human
benchmark, in:PMLR InternationalConference onMachine Learn-
ing, 2020, pp. 507–517.
[126] D. Zhao, H. Wang, K. Shao, Y. Zhu, Deep reinforcement learning
with experience replay based on SARSA, in: IEEE Symposium
Series on Computational Intelligence, 2016, pp. 1–6.
[127] R. J. Williams, Simple statistical gradient-following algorithms for
connectionist reinforcement learning, Springer Machine learning
8 (3-4) (1992) 229–256.
[128] J. Schulman, S. Levine, P. Abbeel, M. Jordan, P. Moritz, Trust
RegionPolicyOptimization,in:PMLRInternationalConferenceon
Machine Learning, Vol. 37, 2015, pp. 1889–1897.
[129] J. Schulman, F. Wolski, P. Dhariwal, A. Radford, O. Klimov, Proxi-
mal Policy Optimization Algorithms, arXiv:1707.06347 (2017).
[130] K.Cobbe,J.Hilton,O.Klimov,J.Schulman,PhasicPolicyGradient,
arXiv:2009.04416 (2020).
[131] Y. Liu, P. Ramachandran, Q. Liu, J. Peng, Stein Variational Policy
Gradient, arXiv:1704.02399 (2017).
[132] A. X. Lee, A. Nagabandi, P. Abbeel, S. Levine, Stochastic latent
actor-critic: Deep reinforcement learning with a latent variable
model, arXiv:1907.00953 (2019).
[133] S. Zhang, H. Yao, ACE: An Actor Ensemble Algorithm for contin-
uous control with tree search, in: AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial
Intelligence, Vol. 33, 2019, pp. 5789–5796. doi:10.1609/aaai.
v33i01.33015789.
[134] S.Zhang,S.Whiteson,DAC:Thedoubleactor-criticarchitecturefor
learning options, arXiv:1904.12691 (2019).
[135] N.Heess,J.J.Hunt,T.P.Lillicrap,D.Silver,Memory-BasedControl
with Recurrent Neural Networks, arXiv:1512.04455 (2015).
[136] T. P. Lillicrap, J. J. Hunt, A. Pritzel, N. Heess, T. Erez, Y. Tassa,
D. Silver, D. Wierstra, Continuous control with deep reinforcement
learning, arXiv:1509.02971 (2015).
[137] S.Fujimoto,H.Hoof,D.Meger,Addressingfunctionapproximation
errorinactor-criticmethods,in:PMLRInternationalConferenceon
Machine Learning, 2018, pp. 1587–1596.
[138] T. Haarnoja, A. Zhou, P. Abbeel, S. Levine, Soft Actor-Critic:
Oﬀ-policy maximum entropy deep reinforcement learning with a
stochastic actor, in: PMLR International Conference on Machine
Learning, 2018, pp. 1861–1870.
[139] G. Barth-Maron, M. W. Hoﬀman, D. Budden, W. Dabney, D. Hor-
gan, D. Tb, A. Muldal, N. Heess, T. Lillicrap, Distributed distribu-
tional deterministic policy gradients, arXiv:1804.08617 (2018).
[140] V. Mnih, A. P. Badia, M. Mirza, A. Graves, T. Lillicrap, T. Harley,
D. Silver, K. Kavukcuoglu, Asynchronous methods for deep rein-
forcementlearning,in:PMLRInternationalConferenceonMachine
Learning, 2016, pp. 1928–1937.
[141] N. Heess, D. TB, S. Sriram, J. Lemmon, J. Merel, G. Wayne,
Y. Tassa, T. Erez, Z. Wang, S. Eslami, et al., Emergence of loco-
motion behaviours in rich environments, arXiv:1707.02286 (2017).
[142] C. Alfredo, C. Humberto, C. Arjun, Eﬃcient parallel methods for
deep reinforcement learning, in: The Multi-disciplinary Conference
on Reinforcement Learning and Decision Making, 2017, pp. 1–6.
[143] Z. Wang, V. Bapst, N. Heess, V. Mnih, R. Munos, K. Kavukcuoglu,
N. de Freitas, Sample eﬃcient actor-critic with experience replay,
arXiv:1611.01224 (2016).
[144] A. Gruslys, W. Dabney, M. G. Azar, B. Piot, M. Bellemare,
R.Munos,Thereactor:Afastandsample-eﬃcientactor-criticagent
for reinforcement learning, arXiv:1704.04651 (2017).
[145] Y. Wu, E. Mansimov, R. B. Grosse, S. Liao, J. Ba, Scalable Trust-
Region method for deep reinforcement learning using Kronecker-
Factored Approximation, in: Advances in Neural Information Pro-
cessing Systems, 2017, pp. 5279–5288.
[146] R. Lowe, Y. Wu, A. Tamar, J. Harb, P. Abbeel, I. Mordatch,
Multi-Agent Actor-Critic for mixed cooperative-competitive envi-
ronments, arXiv:1706.02275 (2017).
[147] J. Ackermann, V. Gabler, T. Osa, M. Sugiyama, Reducing overesti-
mationbiasinmulti-agentdomainsusingdoublecentralizedcritics,
arXiv:1910.01465 (2019).
[148] S. Iqbal, F. Sha, Actor-Attention-Critic for Multi-Agent Reinforce-
ment Learning, in: PMLR International Conference on Machine
Learning, 2019, pp. 2961–2970.
[149] L. Espeholt, H. Soyer, R. Munos, K. Simonyan, V. Mnih, T. Ward,
Y.Doron,V.Firoiu,T.Harley,I.Dunning,etal.,IMPALA:Scalable
distributed deep-rl with importance weighted actor-learner archi-
tectures, in: PMLR International Conference on Machine Learning,
2018, pp. 1407–1416.
[150] L. Espeholt, R. Marinier, P. Stanczyk, K. Wang, M. Michalski,
Seed RL: Scalable and Eﬃcient Deep-RL with accelerated central
inference, arXiv:1910.06591 (2019).
[151] H. Hasselt, Double Q-learning, Advances in Neural Information
Processing Systems 23 (2010) 2613–2621.
[152] Y. Burda, H. Edwards, A. Storkey, O. Klimov, Exploration by
random network distillation, arXiv:1810.12894 (2018).
[153] R.S.Sutton,D.A.McAllester,S.P.Singh,Y.Mansour,Policygradi-
entmethodsforreinforcementlearningwithfunctionapproximation,
in: Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 2000, pp.
AlMahamid & Grolinger:Preprint submitted to Elsevier Page 23 of 24

===== PAGE 24 =====

Autonomous UAV Navigation using RL: A Systematic Review
1057–1063.
[154] S.-Y. Shin, Y.-W. Kang, Y.-G. Kim, Obstacle Avoidance Drone by
Deep Reinforcement Learning and Its Racing with Human Pilot,
MDPI Applied Sciences 9 (24) (2019).doi:10.3390/app9245571.
[155] Q. Liu, D. Wang, Stein variational gradient descent: A general
purpose bayesian inference algorithm, arXiv:1608.04471 (2016).
[156] D. Wierstra, A. Förster, J. Peters, J. Schmidhuber, Recurrent Policy
Gradients, Logic Journal of the IGPL 18 (5) (2010) 620–634.
[157] J.Martens,R.Grosse,OptimizingNeuralNetworkswithKronecker-
Factored Approximate Curvature, in: PMLR International confer-
ence on machine learning, 2015, pp. 2408–2417.
[158] R. Munos, T. Stepleton, A. Harutyunyan, M. G. Bellemare, Safe
and eﬃcient oﬀ-policy reinforcement learning, arXiv:1606.02647
(2016).
[159] M. Andrychowicz, A. Raichuk, P. Stanczyk, M. Orsini, S. Girgin,
R.Marinier,L.Hussenot,M.Geist,O.Pietquin,M.Michalski,etal.,
WhatMattersInOn-PolicyReinforcementLearning?ALarge-Scale
Empirical Study, CoRR abs/2006.05990 (2020).
Fadi AlMahamid received the B.Sc. degree
(Hons.) in Computer Science from Princess
Sumaya University for Technology (PSUT), Am-
man, Jordan, in 2001, and M.Sc. degree (Hons.)
in Computer Science from New York Institute
of Technology (NYIT), Amman, Jordan, in 2003.
Also, he obtained another M.Sc. from the Univer-
sity of Western Ontario (UWO), London, Ontario,
Canada,in2019,whereheiscurrentlypursuingthe
Ph.D.degreeinSoftwareEngineeringwiththeDe-
partment of Electrical and Computer Engineering.
Hehasextensiveindustryexperienceofmorethan
15years.Hiscurrentresearchinterestsincludema-
chine learning, autonomous vehicles focusing on
navigation problems, IoT architectures, and sensor
data analytics.
KatarinaGrolinger receivedtheB.Sc.andM.Sc.
degrees in mechanical engineering from the Uni-
versity of Zagreb, Croatia, and the M.Eng. and
Ph.D. degrees in software engineering from West-
ern University, London, Canada. She is currently
an Assistant Professor with the Department of
Electrical and Computer Engineering, Western
University. She has been involved in the software
engineeringareainacademiaandindustry,forover
20 years. Her current research interests include
machinelearning,sensordataanalytics,dataman-
agement, and the IoT.
AlMahamid & Grolinger:Preprint submitted to Elsevier Page 24 of 24