

===== PAGE 1 =====

Journal of Machine Learning Research 16 (2015) 1437-1480 Submitted 12/13; Revised 11/14; Published 8/15
A Comprehensive Survey on Safe Reinforcement Learning
Javier Garc´ ıa fjgpolo@inf.uc3m.es
Fernando Fern´ andez ffernand@inf.uc3m.es
Universidad Carlos III de Madrid,
Avenida de la Universidad 30,
28911 Leganes, Madrid, Spain
Editor: Joelle Pineau
Abstract
Safe Reinforcement Learning can be deﬁned as the process of learning policies that maxi-
mize the expectation of the return in problems in which it is important to ensure reasonable
system performance and/or respect safety constraints during the learning and/or deploy-
ment processes. We categorize and analyze two approaches of Safe Reinforcement Learning.
The ﬁrst is based on the modiﬁcation of the optimality criterion, the classic discounted ﬁ-
nite/inﬁnite horizon, with a safety factor. The second is based on the modiﬁcation of the
exploration process through the incorporation of external knowledge or the guidance of a
risk metric. We use the proposed classiﬁcation to survey the existing literature, as well as
suggesting future directions for Safe Reinforcement Learning.
Keywords: reinforcement learning, risk sensitivity, safe exploration, teacher advice
1. Introduction
In reinforcement learning (RL) tasks, the agent perceives the state of the environment, and
it acts in order to maximize the long-term return which is based on a real valued reward
signal (Sutton and Barto, 1998). However, in some situations in which the safety of the
agent is particularly important, for example in expensive robotic platforms, researchers are
paying increasing attention not only to the long-term reward maximization, but also to
damage avoidance (Mihatsch and Neuneier, 2002; Hans et al., 2008; Mart´ ın H. and Lope,
2009; Koppejan and Whiteson, 2011; Garc´ ıa and Fern´ andez, 2012).
The safety concept, or its opposite, risk, have taken many forms in the RL literature,
and it does not necessarily refer to physical issues. In many works, risk is related to the
stochasticity of the environment and with the fact that, in those environments, even an
optimal policy (with respect the return) may perform poorly in some cases (Coraluppi and
Marcus, 1999; Heger, 1994b). In these approaches, the risk concept is related to the inher-
ent uncertainty of the environment (i.e., with its stochastic nature). Since maximizing the
long-term reward does not necessarily avoid the rare occurrences of large negative outcomes,
we need other criteria to evaluate risk. In this case, the long-term reward maximization is
transformed to include some notion of risk related to the variance of the return (Howard
and Matheson, 1972; Sato et al., 2002) or its worst-outcome (Heger, 1994b; Borkar, 2002;
Gaskett, 2003). In other works, the optimization criterion is transformed to include the
probability of visiting error states (Geibel and Wysotzki, 2005), or transforming the tem-
c⃝2015 Javier Garc´ ıa and Fernando Fern´ andez.

===== PAGE 2 =====

Garc´ıa and Fern´andez
poral diﬀerences to more heavily weighted events that are unexpectedly bad (Mihatsch and
Neuneier, 2002).
Other works do not change the optimization criterion, but the exploration process di-
rectly. During the learning process, the agent makes decisions about which action to choose,
either to ﬁnd out more about the environment or to take one step closer towards the
goal. In RL, techniques for selecting actions during the learning phase are called explo-
ration/exploitation strategies. Most exploration methods are based on heuristics, rely on
statistics collected from sampling the environment, or have a random exploratory com-
ponent (e.g., ϵ − greedy). Their goal is to explore the state space eﬃciently. However,
most of those exploration methods are blind to the risk of actions. To avoid risky situa-
tions, the exploration process is often modiﬁed by including prior knowledge of the task.
This prior knowledge can be used to provide initial information to the RL algorithm bi-
asing the subsequent exploratory process (Driessens and Dˇ zeroski, 2004; Mart´ ın H. and
Lope, 2009; Koppejan and Whiteson, 2011), to provide a ﬁnite set of demonstrations on
the task (Abbeel and Ng, 2005; Abbeel et al., 2010), or to provide guidance (Clouse, 1997;
Garc´ ıa and Fern´ andez, 2012). Approaches based on prior knowledge were not all originally
built to handle risky domains but, by the way they were designed, they have been demon-
strated to be particularly suitable for this kind of problem. For example, initial knowledge
was used to bootstrap an evolutionary approach by the winner of the helicopter control
task of the 2009 RL competition (Mart´ ın H. and Lope, 2009). In this approach, several
neural networks that clone error-free teacher policies are added to the initial population
(facilitating the rapid convergence of the algorithm to a near-optimal policy and, indirectly,
reducing agent damage or injury). Indeed, as the winner of the helicopter domain is the
agent with the highest cumulative reward, the winner must also indirectly reduce helicopter
crashes insofar as these incur large catastrophic negative rewards. Although the compe-
tition is based on the performance after the learning phase, these methods demonstrate
that reducing the number of catastrophic situations, also during the learning phase, can be
particularly interesting in real robots where the learning phase is performed in an on-line
manner, and not through simulators. Instead, Abbeel and Ng (2005); Abbeel et al. (2010)
use a ﬁnite set of demonstrations from a teacher to derive a safety policy for the helicopter
control task, while minimizing the helicopter crashes. Finally, the guidance provided by a
teacher during the exploratory process has also been demonstrated to be an eﬀective method
to avoid dangerous or catastrophic states (Garc´ ıa and Fern´ andez, 2012). In another line
of research, the exploration process is conducted using some form of risk metric based on
the temporal diﬀerences (Gehring and Precup, 2013) or in the weighted sum of an entropy
measure and the expected return (Law, 2005).
In this manuscript, we present a comprehensive survey of work which considers the
concepts of safety and/or risk within the RL community. We call this subﬁeld within RL,
Safe Reinforcement Learning. Safe RL can be deﬁned as the process of learning policies
that maximize the expectation of the return in problems in which it is important to ensure
reasonable system performance and/or respect safety constraints during the learning and/or
deployment processes. Safe RL algorithms suﬀer from the lack of an established taxonomy in
which to organize existing approaches. In this survey, we have contributed such a structure,
through a categorization of Safe RL algorithms. We segment Safe RL algorithms into
two fundamental tendencies. The ﬁrst consists of transforming the optimization criterion.
1438

===== PAGE 3 =====

A Comprehensive Survey on Safe Reinforcement Learning
The second consists of modifying the exploration process in two ways: (i) through the
incorporation of external knowledge, and, (ii) through the use of a risk metric. In this
category, we focus on those RL approaches tested in risky domains that reduce or prevent
undesirable situations through the modiﬁcation of the exploration process. The objective
of this is to become a starting point for researchers who are initiating their endeavors in
Safe RL. It is important to note that the second category includes the ﬁrst since modifying
the optimization criterion will also modify the exploration process. However, in the ﬁrst
category we consider those approaches that transform the optimization criterion in some
way to include a form of risk. On the other hand, the optimization criterion in the second
category remains, while the exploration process is modiﬁed to consider some form of risk.
Resulting from these considerations, the remainder of the paper is organized as follows.
Section 2 presents an overview and a categorization of Safe RL algorithms existing in the
literature. The methods based on the transformation of the optimization criterion are
examined in Section 3. The methods that modify the exploration process by the use of
prior knowledge or a risk metric are considered in Section 4. In Section 5 we discuss the
surveyed methods and identify open areas of research for future work. Finally, we conclude
with Section 6.
2. Overview of Safe Reinforcement Learning
We consider learning in Markov Decision Processes (MDP) described formally by a tuple
< S, A, T, R > , where S is the state space, A is the action space, T : S × A → S is the
transition function and R : S × A → R is the reward function (Putterman, 1994). In this
survey, we consider two main trends for Safe RL (Table 1) to learn in MDPs. The ﬁrst
one is based on the modiﬁcation of the optimality criterion to introduce the concept of risk
(Section 3). The second is based on the modiﬁcation of the exploration process to avoid
the exploratory actions that can lead the learning system to undesirable or catastrophic
situations (Section 4).
Optimization Criterion . As regards the ﬁrst, the objective of traditional RL al-
gorithms is to ﬁnd an optimal control policy; that is, to ﬁnd a function which speciﬁes
an action or a strategy for some state of the system to optimize a criterion. This op-
timization criterion may be to minimize time or any other cost metric, or to maximize
rewards, etc. The optimization criterion in RL is described by a variety of terms within the
published literature, including the expected return, expected sum of rewards, cumulative
reward, cumulative discounted reward or return. Within this article, to avoid terminology
misunderstandings, we use the term return.
Deﬁnition 1 Return. The term return is used to refer to the expected cumulative future
discounted reward R = ∑∞
t=0 γtrt, where rt represents a single real value used to evaluate the
selection of an action in a particular state (i.e., the reward), and γ ∈ [0, 1] is the discount
factor that allows the inﬂuence of future rewards to be controlled.
This optimization criterion is not always the most suitable one in dangerous or risky
tasks (Heger, 1994b; Mihatsch and Neuneier, 2002; Geibel and Wysotzki, 2005). There are
several alternatives to this optimization criterion in order to consider risk. In this survey,
1439

===== PAGE 4 =====

Garc´ıa and Fern´andez
Safe RL



Optimization Criterion



Worst Case Criterion



Inherent Uncertainty
Heger (1994b,a)
Gaskett (2003)
Parameter Uncertainty
Nilim and El Ghaoui (2005)
Tamar et al. (2013)
Risk-Sensitive Criterion



Exponential Functions
Howard and Matheson (1972)
Borkar (2001, 2002)
Basu et al. (2008)
Weighted Sum of Return and Risk
Mihatsch and Neuneier (2002)
Sato et al. (2002)
Geibel and Wysotzki (2005)
Constrained Criterion
Moldovan and Abbeel (2011, 2012a)
Castro et al. (2012)
Kadota et al. (2006)
Other Optimization Criteria
Morimura et al. (2010a,b)
Luenberger (2013)
Castro et al. (2012)
Exploration Process



External Knowledge



Providing Initial Knowledge
Driessens and Dˇ zeroski (2004)
Mart´ ın H. and Lope (2009)
Song et al. (2012)
Deriving a Policy from Demonstrations
Abbeel et al. (2010)
Tang et al. (2010)
Teacher Advice



Ask for Help
Clouse (1997)
Garc´ ıa and Fern´ andez (2012)
Geramifard et al. (2013)
Teacher Provide Advices
Clouse and Utgoﬀ (1992)
Thomaz and Breazeal (2006, 2008)
Vidal et al. (2013)
Other Approaches
Rosenstein and Barto (2002, 2004)
Kuhlmann et al. (2004)
Torrey and Taylor (2012)
Risk-directed Exploration
Gehring and Precup (2013)
Law (2005)
Table 1: Overview of the approaches for Safe Reinforcement Learning considered in this
survey.
1440

===== PAGE 5 =====

A Comprehensive Survey on Safe Reinforcement Learning
we categorize these optimization criteria in four groups: (i) the worst-case criterion, (ii) the
risk-sensitive criterion, (iii) the constrained criterion, and (iv) other optimization criteria.
• Worst Case Criterion. The ﬁrst criterion is based on the Worst Case Criterion where
a policy is considered to be optimal if it has the maximum worst-case return (Sec-
tion 3.1). This criterion is used to mitigate the eﬀects of the variability induced by
a given policy, since this variability can lead to risk or undesirable situations. This
variability can be due to two types of uncertainties: the inherent uncertainty related
to the stochastic nature of the system (Heger, 1994b,a; Gaskett, 2003), and the pa-
rameter uncertainty related to some of the parameters of the MDP are not known
exactly (Nilim and El Ghaoui, 2005; Tamar et al., 2013).
• Risk-Sensitive Criterion . In other approaches, the optimization criterion is trans-
formed so as to reﬂect a subjective measure balancing the return and the risk. These
approaches are known as risk-sensitive approaches and are characterized by the pres-
ence of a parameter that allows thesensitivity to the risk to be controlled (Section 3.2).
In these cases, the optimization criterion is transformed into an exponential utility
function (Howard and Matheson, 1972), or a linear combination of return and risk,
where risk can be deﬁned as the variance of the return (Markowitz, 1952; Sato et al.,
2002), or as the probability of entering into an error state (Geibel and Wysotzki,
2005).
• Constrained Criterion. The purpose of this objective is to maximize the return subject
to one or more constraints resulting in the constrained optimization criterion (Sec-
tion 3.3). In such a case, we want to maximize the return while keeping other types
of expected measures higher (or lower) than some given bounds (Kadota et al., 2006;
Moldovan and Abbeel, 2012a).
• Other Optimization Criteria . Finally, other approaches are based on the use of opti-
mization criteria falling into the area of ﬁnancial engineering, such as the r-squared,
value-at-risk (VaR) (Mausser and Rosen, 1998; Kashima, 2007; Luenberger, 2013), or
the density of the return (Morimura et al., 2010a,b) (Section 3.4).
Exploration Process . As regards the modiﬁcation of the exploration process, there
are also several approaches to overcoming the problems where the exploratory actions may
have serious consequences. Most RL algorithms begin learning with no external knowledge
of the task. In such cases, exploration strategies such as ϵ−greedy are used. The application
of this strategy results in the random exploration of the state and action spaces to gather
knowledge on the task. Only when enough information is discovered from the environment,
does the algorithm’s behavior improve. The randomized exploration strategies, however,
waste a signiﬁcant amount of time exploring irrelevant regions of the state and action spaces,
or lead the agent to undesirable states which may result in damage or injury to the agent,
the learning system or external entities. In this survey we consider two ways of modifying
the exploration process to avoid risk situations: (i) through the incorporation of external
knowledge and, (ii) through the use of a risk-directed exploration.
1441

===== PAGE 6 =====

Garc´ıa and Fern´andez
• External Knowledge. We distinguish three ways of incorporating prior knowledge into
the exploration process (Section 4.1) by: (i) providing initial knowledge, (ii) deriving
a policy from a ﬁnite set of demonstrations and, (iii) providing teach advice.
– Providing Initial Knowledge . To mitigate the aforementioned exploration diﬃ-
culties, examples gathered from a teacher or previous information on the task can
be used to provide initial knowledge for the learning algorithm (Section 4.1.1).
This knowledge can be used to bootstrap the learning algorithm (i.e., a type of
initialization procedure). Following this initialization, the system can switch to a
Boltzmann or fully greedy exploration based on the values predicted in the initial
training phase (Driessens and Dˇ zeroski, 2004). In this way, the learning algo-
rithm is exposed to the most relevant regions of the state and action spaces from
the earliest steps of the learning process, thereby eliminating the time needed in
random exploration for the discovery of these regions.
– Deriving a policy from a ﬁnite set of demonstrations. In a similar way, a set of ex-
amples provided by a teacher can be used to derive a policy from demonstrations
(Section 4.1.2). In this case, the examples provided by the random exploration
policy are replaced by the examples provided by the teacher. In contrast to the
previous category, this external knowledge is not used to bootstrap the learning
algorithm, but is used to learn a model from which to derive a policy in an oﬀ-line
and, hence, safe manner (Abbeel et al., 2010; Tang et al., 2010).
– Providing Teach Advice. Other approaches based on teacher advice assist the
exploration during the learning process (Section 4.1.3). They assume the avail-
ability of a teacher for the learning agent. The teacher may be a human or
a simple controller, but in both cases it does not need to be an expert in the
task. At every step, the agent observes the state, chooses an action, and receives
the reward with the objective of maximizing the return or other optimization
criterion. The teacher shares this goal, and provides actions or information to
the learner agent. Both the agent and the teacher can initiate this interaction
during the learning process. In the ask for help approaches (Section 4.1.3.1),
the learner agent requests advice from the teacher when it considers it neces-
sary (Clouse, 1997; Garc´ ıa and Fern´ andez, 2012). In other words, the teacher
only provides advice to the learner agent when it is explicitly asked to. In other
approaches (Section 4.1.3.2), it is the teacher who provides actions whenever it
feels it is necessary (Thomaz and Breazeal, 2008; Vidal et al., 2013). In another
group of approaches (Section 4.1.3.3), the main role in this interaction is not so
clear (Rosenstein and Barto, 2004; Torrey and Taylor, 2012).
• Risk-directed Exploration. In these approaches a risk measure is used to determine the
probability of selecting diﬀerent actions during the exploration process (Section 4.2)
while the classic optimization criterion remains (Gehring and Precup, 2013; Law,
2005).
1442

===== PAGE 7 =====

A Comprehensive Survey on Safe Reinforcement Learning
3. Modifying the Optimization Criterion
This section describes the methods of the ﬁrst category of the proposed taxonomy based
on the transformation of the optimization criterion. The approaches using the return as
the objective function are referred to as risk-neutral control (Putterman, 1994), because
the variance and higher order moments in the probability distribution of the rewards are
neglected.
Deﬁnition 2 Risk-Neutral Criterion . In risk-neutral control, the objective is to com-
pute (or learn) a control policy that maximizes the expectation of the return,
max
π∈Π
Eπ(R) = max
π∈Π
Eπ(
∞∑
t=0
γtrt), (1)
where Eπ(·) stands for the expectation with respect to the policy π.
The decision maker may be also interested in other objective functions, diﬀerent from
the expectation of the return, to consider the notion of risk. In this case, risk is related to
the fact that even an optimal policy may perform poorly in some cases due to the variability
of the problem, and the fact that the process behavior is partially known. Because of the
latter, the objective function is transformed, resulting in various risk-aware approaches. In
this survey, we focus on three optimization criterion: the worst case criterion, the risk-
sensitive criterion, and the constrained criterion. These approaches are discussed in detail
in the following sections.
3.1 Worst-Case Criterion
In many applications, we would like to use an optimization criterion that incorporates a
penalty for the variability induced by a given policy, since this variability can lead to risk
or undesirable situations. This variability can be due to two types of uncertainties: a) the
inherent uncertainty related to the stochastic nature of the system, and b) the parameter
uncertainty, related to some of the parameters of the MDP are not known exactly. To
mitigate this problem, the agent maximizes the return associated to the worst-case scenario,
even though the case may be highly unlikely.
3.1.1 Worst-Case Criterion under Inherent Uncertainty
This approach is discussed at length in the literature (Heger, 1994b; Coraluppi, 1997;
Coraluppi and Marcus, 1999, 2000).
Deﬁnition 3 Worst-Case or Minimax Criterion under inherent uncertainty . In
worst-case or minimax control the objective is to compute (or learn) a control policy that
maximizes the expectation of the return with respect to the worst case scenario (i.e., the
worst outcome) incurred in the learning process using,
max
π∈Π
min
w∈Ωπ
Eπ,w(R) = max
π∈Π
min
w∈Ωπ
Eπ,w(
∞∑
t=0
γtrt), (2)
1443

===== PAGE 8 =====

Garc´ıa and Fern´andez
where Ωπ is a set of trajectories of the form (s0, a0, s1, a1, . . .) that occurs under policy π,
and where Eπ,w(·) stands for the expectation with respect to the policy π and the trajectory
w. That is, we are interested in the policy π ∈ Π with the max-min outcome.
We brieﬂy review the diﬀerence between the risk-neutral and worst-case criterion using
the example provided by Hedger, replicated in Figure 1 (see Heger, 1994b).
Figure 1: Diﬀerence between risk-neutral and worst-case criterion. Example provided
by Heger (1994b). Each transition is labeled as a triple. The ﬁrst number a
in the triple is an admissible action for the state s. The second number stands
for the probability that the state transition will occur if action a is selected in
the corresponding starting state s. The third number represents the immediate
reward for the transition.
In Figure 1, there are three states and transitions between them. Each transition is
represented by three components: the ﬁrst is the action that performs the transition from
one state to the other, the second is the probability of the transition, and the last is
the reward obtained when performing this transition. Additionally, there are two policies
labeled π and µ. In Figure 1, Eπ(R) = 311 + 2 γ and Eµ(R) = 310 + 2 γ. Therefore, by
applying the risk-neutral criterion, the policy π is optimal. However, max inf ( Eπ(R)) =
44 + 2γ and max inf ( Eµ(R)) = 310 + 2 γ. Therefore µ is optimal when applying the
worst-case criterion. In worst case control strategies, the optimality criterion is exclusively
focused on risk-avoidance or risk-averse policies. A policy is considered to be optimal if its
worst-case return is superior.
Heger (1994b) introduces the ˆQ − Learning which can be regarded as the counterpart
to Q-Learning (Watkins, 1989) related to the minimax criterion,
ˆQ(st, at) = min( ˆQ(st, at), rt+1 + γ max
at+1∈A
ˆQ(st+1, at+1)) (3)
The ˆQ value is essentially a lower bound on value. ˆQ − learning and the minimax
criterion are useful when avoiding risk is imperative. Jiang et al. (1998) combine the
simple function approximation state aggregation with the minimax criterion and present
the convergence theory for ˆQ − learning. However, Gaskett (2003) tested ˆQ − learning in a
1444

===== PAGE 9 =====

A Comprehensive Survey on Safe Reinforcement Learning
stochastic cliﬀ world environment, under the condition that actions are picked greedily, and
found that ˆQ−learning demonstrated extreme pessimism which can be more injurious than
beneﬁcial (Gaskett, 2003). Chakravorty and Hyland (2003) apply the minimax criterion
to the actor-critic architecture and presents error bounds when using state aggregation as a
function approximation. In general, the minimax criterion is too restrictive as it takes into
account severe but extremely rare events which may never occur (Mihatsch and Neuneier,
2002). The α − value of the return ˆmα introduced by Heger (1994a) can be seen as an
extension of the worst case control of MDPs. This concept establishes that the returns
R < ˆmα of a policy that occur with a probability of less than α are ignored. The algorithm
is less pessimistic than the pure worst case control, given that extremely rare scenarios have
no eﬀect on the policy.
Gaskett (2003) proposes a new extension to Q-learning, β-pessimistic Q − learning,
which compromises between the extreme optimism of standardQ−learning and the extreme
pessimism of minimax approaches,
Qβ(st, at) = Qβ(st, at) +α(rt+1 + γ((1 − β) max
at+1∈A
Qβ(st+1, at+1) +β min
at+1∈A
Qβ(st+1, at+1)))
(4)
In the β-pessimistic Q − learning algorithm the value of β ∈ [0, 1] renders the equation
into the standard Q − learning or the minimax algorithm respectively (Gaskett, 2003).
Experimental results show that when β = 0 .5, the algorithm reaches the same level of
pessimism as ˆQ − learning, although the agent manages to reach the goal state in some
cases, unlike in ˆQ − learning.
3.1.2 Worst-Case Criterion under Parameter Uncertainty
Some RL approaches are focused to learning the model ﬁrst which is assumed to be correct,
and then applying a dynamic programming to it to learn and optimal policy. However, in
practice, the model learned is typically estimated from noisy data or insuﬃcient training
examples, or even worse, they may change during the execution of a policy. These modeling
errors may have fatal consequences in real, physical systems, where there are often states
that are really catastrophic and must be avoided even during learning. This problem is faced
by the robust control community (Zhou et al., 1996), whose one goal is to build policies with
satisfactory online performance and robustness to model errors. Speciﬁcally, a robust MDP
deals with uncertainties in parameters; that is, some of the parameters, namely, transition
probabilities, of the MDP are not known exactly (Bagnell et al., 2001; Iyengar, 2004; Nilim
and El Ghaoui, 2005).
Deﬁnition 4 Worst-Case or Minimax Criterion under parameter uncertainty .
Typically this criterion is described in terms of a set (uncertainty set), P , of possible tran-
sition matrices, and the objective is to maximize the expectation of the return for the worst
case policy over all possible models p ∈ P ,
max
π∈Π
min
p∈P
Eπ,p(R) = max
π∈Π
min
p∈P
Eπ,p(
∞∑
t=0
γtrt), (5)
1445

===== PAGE 10 =====

Garc´ıa and Fern´andez
where Eπ,p(·) stands for the expectation with respect to the policy π and the transition model
p.
The problem of parameter uncertainty has been recognized in the reinforcement learning
community as well, and algorithms have been suggested to deal with it (Tamar et al., 2013).
Typical model-based reinforcement algorithms ignore this type of uncertainty. However,
minimizing the risk is one of several imports in model-based reinforcement learning solu-
tions, particularly ones in which failure has important consequences (Bagnell and Schneider,
2008), as a learned model invariably has certain inaccuracies, due to insuﬃcient or noise
training data (Bagnell, 2004).
3.2 Risk-Sensitive Criterion
In risk-sensitive RL, the agent has to strike a balance between getting large reinforcements
and avoiding catastrophic situations even if they occur with very small probability. For
example, a proﬁt-maximizing ﬁrm may want to be conservative in making business decisions
to avoid bankruptcy even if its conservation will probably lower the expected proﬁts.
Deﬁnition 5 Risk-Sensitive Criterion . In risk-sensitive RL, the objective function in-
cludes a scalar parameter β that allows the desired level of risk to be controlled. The pa-
rameter β is known as the risk sensitivity parameter, and is generally either positive or
negative: β > 0 implies risk aversion, β < 0 implies a risk-seeking preference, and (through
a limiting argument) β = 0 implies risk neutrality.
Depending on the form of the objective function, it is possible to consider various risk-
sensitive RL algorithms.
3.2.1 Risk-Sensitive Based on Exponential Functions
In risk-sensitive control based on the use of exponential utility functions , the return R is
transformed to reﬂect a subjective measure of utility (Howard and Matheson, 1972; Chung
and Sobel, 1987). Instead of maximizing the expected value of R, the objective here is to
maximize
max
π∈Π
β−1logEπ(expβR) = max
π∈Π
β−1logEπ(expβ ∑∞
t=0γtrt), (6)
where β is a parameter and R is the return. A straightforward Taylor expansion of the
exp and log terms of Equation 6 yields in Equation (by using the big O notation)
max
π∈Π
β−1logEπ(expβR) = max
π∈Π
Eπ(R) + β
2 V ar(R) + O(β2), (7)
where V ar(R) denotes the variance of the return. Variability is penalized for β < 0 and
enforced for β > 0. Therefore, the objective is risk-averse for β < 0, risk-seeking for β > 0
and risk-neutral for β = 0.
Most of the work of this trend is within the MDP framework where the transition
probabilities and rewards are explicitly available. As an example, Patek (2001) analyzed a
class of terminating MDPs with a risk-averse, expected-exponential criterion, with compact
constraint sets. By restricting attention to risk-averse problems ( β > 0) with all transition
1446

===== PAGE 11 =====

A Comprehensive Survey on Safe Reinforcement Learning
costs strictly positive, and by assuming the existence of a stationary policy, the authors
established the existence of stationary optimal policies. More recently, Osogami (2012)
and Moldovan and Abbeel (2012b) demonstrate that a risk-sensitive MDP for maximizing
the expected exponential utility is equivalent to a robust MDP for maximizing the worst-
case criterion. Although the exponential utility approach constitutes the most popular
and best analyzed risk-sensitive control framework in the literature, there remain serious
drawbacks which prevent the formulation of corresponding RL algorithms (Mihatsch and
Neuneier, 2002): time-dependent optimal policies, and no model-free RL algorithms for
both deterministic and stochastic reward structures. As a result, the use of this criterion
does not lend itself easily to model-free reinforcement learning methods such as TD(0) or Q-
learning (Heger, 1994b). Therefore, much less work has been done within the RL framework
using this exponential utility function as an optimization criterion, with a notable exception
of Borkar (2001, 2002) who relaxes the assumption of a system model by deriving a variant
of the Q-learning algorithm for ﬁnite MDPs with an exponential utility. Basu et al. (2008)
present an approach, extending the works by Borkar (2001, 2002), for Markov decision
processes with an inﬁnite horizon risk-sensitive cost based on an exponential function. Its
convergence is proved using the ordinary diﬀerential equation (o.d.e) method for stochastic
approximation, and it is also extended to continuous state space processes.
In a diﬀerent line of work, Chang-Ming et al. (2007) demonstrated that the max operator
in Equation 6 can be replaced with a generalized averaged operator in order to improve the
robustness of RL algorithms. From a more practical point of view, Liu et al. (2003) use an
exponential function in the context of auction agents. Since companies are often risk-averse,
the authors derive a closed form of the optimal bidding function for auction agents that
maximize the expected utility of the proﬁt for concave exponential utility functions.
However, all the approaches considered in this trend share the same idea: associate the
risk with the variance of the return. Higher variance implies more instability and, hence,
more risk. Therefore, it should be noted that the aforementioned approaches are not suited
for problems where a policy with a small variance can produce a large risk (Geibel and
Wysotzki, 2005).
3.2.2 Risk-Sensitive RL Based on the Weighted Sum of Return and Risk
In this trend, the objective function is expressed as the weighted sum of return and risk
given by
max
π∈Π
(Eπ(R) − β ω ) (8)
In Equation 8, Eπ(R) refers to the expectation of the return with respect the pol-
icy π, β is the risk-sensitive parameter, and ω refers to the consideration of the risk
concept which can take various forms. A general objective function is the well-known
Markowitz criterion (Markowitz, 1952) where the ω in Equation 8 is replaced by the vari-
ance of the return, V ar(R). This criterion is also known in the literature as variance-
penalized criterion (Gosavi, 2009), expected value-variance criterion (Taha, 1992; Heger,
1994b) and expected-value-minus-variance-criterion (Geibel and Wysotzki, 2005). Within
the RL framework, Sato et al. (2002) propose an approach that directly optimizes an ob-
jective function deﬁned as a linear combination of the mean and the variance of the return.
However, this is based on the assumption of the mean-variance model where the distribution
1447

===== PAGE 12 =====

Garc´ıa and Fern´andez
of the return follows a Gaussian distribution, which does not hold in most situations. There
are several limitations when using the return variance as a measure of risk. First, the fat
tails of the distribution are not accounted for. Consequently, risk can be underestimated
due to the ignorance of low probability, but highly severe events. Second, variance penalizes
both positive and negative risk equally and does not distinguish between the two. Third,
this criterion is incorrectly applied to many cases in which risk cannot be described by
the variance of the return (Szeg¨ o, 2005). Additionally, mean minus variance optimization
within the MDP framework has been shown to be NP-hard in general, and optimizing this
criterion can directly lead to counterintuitive policies (Mannor and Tsitsiklis, 2011).
Mihatsch and Neuneier (2002) replace the ω in Equation 8 with the temporal diﬀerence
errors that occur during learning. Their learning algorithm has a parameter β ∈ (−1.0, 1.0)
that allows for switching between risk-averse behavior (β = 1), risk-neutral behavior (β =
0) and risk-seeking behavior (β = −1). Loosely speaking, the authors overweigh transitions
to successor states where the immediate return happen to be smaller than in the average,
and they underweigh transitions to states that promise a higher return than the average.
In the study, the authors demonstrate that the learning algorithm has the same limiting
behavior as exponential utility functions. This method is extended by Campos to deal with
large dimensional state/action spaces (Campos and Langlois, 2003).
Geibel and Wysotzki (2005) replace the ω in Equation 8 with the probability, ρπ(s),
in which a state sequence ( si)i≥0 with s0 = s, generated by the execution of policy π,
terminates in an error state,
ρπ(s) = E(
∞∑
i=0
γi¯r) (9)
In Equation 9, ¯r is a cost function in which ¯r = 1 if an error state occurs and ¯ r = 0 if
not. In this case and, as demonstrated by Garc´ ıa and Fern´ andez (2012),ρπ(s) is learned by
TD methods which require error states (i.e., helicopter crashes or company bankruptcies) to
be visited repeatedly in order to approximate the risk function and, subsequently, to avoid
dangerous situations.
Common to the works of Mihastch and Geibel is the fact that risk-sensitive behavior
is induced by transforming the action values, Q(s, a), or the state values, V (s). There are
several reasons why this may not be desirable: (i) if these values are updated based on a
conservative criterion, the policy may be overly pessimistic; (ii) the worst thing that can
happen to an agent in an environment may have high utility in the long term, but fatal
consequences in the short term; and (iii) the distortion of these values means that the true
long term utility of the actions are lost.
3.3 Constrained Criterion
The constrained criterion is applied in the literature to constrained Markov processes in
which we want to maximize the expectation of the return while keeping other types of
expected utilities lower than some given bounds (Altman, 1992). This approach might be
considered within the second category of the taxonomy described here, since the optimiza-
tion criterion remains. However, the addition of constraints to this optimization criterion is
suﬃcient to consider a transformation and so we consider that it must be included within
1448

===== PAGE 13 =====

A Comprehensive Survey on Safe Reinforcement Learning
this category. The constrained MDP is an extension of the MDP framework described as
the tuple < S, A, R, T, C > , where S, A, R, T are deﬁned as in standard MDP, and C is a
set of constraints applied to the policy.
Deﬁnition 6 Constrained Criterion . In the constrained criterion, the expectation of
the return is maximized subject to one or more constraints, ci ∈ C. The general form of
this criterion is shown in the following
max
π∈Π
Eπ(R) subject to c i ∈ C, ci = {hi ≤ αi}, (10)
where ci represents the ith constraint in C that the policy π must fulﬁll, with ci = {hi ≤ αi}
where hi is a function related with the return and αi is the threshold restricting the values
of this function. Depending of the problem the symbol ≤ in the constraints ci ∈ C may be
replaced by ≥.
We can see the proposed constraints in Equation 10 as restrictions on the space of
allowable policies. Figure 2 shows the entire policy space, Π, and the set of allowable
policies, Γ ⊂ Π, where each policy π ∈ Γ satisﬁes the constraints ci ∈ C.
Figure 2: Policy space, Π, and the set of allowable policies, Γ ⊂ Π, where each policy π ∈ Γ
satisﬁes the constraints ci ∈ C.
Therefore, Equation 10 can be transformed into
max
π∈Γ
Eπ(R) (11)
From a safety point of view, this optimization criterion is particularly suitable for risky
domains. In these domains, the objective may be seen as ﬁnding the best policy π in the
space of considered safe policies, Γ. This space, Γ, may be restricted using various types of
constraints: constraints to ensure that the expectation of the return exceeds some speciﬁc
minimum threshold, to ensure that the variance of the return does not exceed speciﬁc
maximum threshold, to enforce ergodicity, to ensure speciﬁc restrictions of the problem.
1449

===== PAGE 14 =====

Garc´ıa and Fern´andez
A typical constraint is referred to ensure that the expectation of the return exceeds
some speciﬁc minimum threshold, E(R) ≥ α (Geibel, 2006). In this case, the space of
considered safe policies, Γ, is made up of the policies for which the expectation of return
exceeds the speciﬁc threshold, α. This is suitable in situations in which we already know a
reasonably good policy, and we want to improve it through exploration, but the expectation
of the return may not fall below a given safety margin. In these kinds of problem, one can
derive the LP problem by using a Lagrangian approach which allows us to transform the
constrained problem into a equivalent non-constrained one. As an example, Kadota et al.
(2006) transform the constrained criterion into a Lagrangian expression. In this way, the
method reduces the constrained problem with n variables to one with n + k unrestricted
variables, where k is equal to the number of restrictions. Thus, the resulting expression
can be solved more easily. The previous constraint is a hard constraint that cannot be
violated, but other approaches allow a certain admissible chance of constraint violation.
This chance-constraint metric, P (E(R) ≥ α) ≥ (1 − ϵ), is interpreted as guaranteeing that
the expectation of the return (considered a random variable) will be at least as good as α
with a probability greater than or equal to (1 − ϵ) (Delage and Mannor, 2010; Ponda et al.,
2013).
Instead, other approaches use a diﬀerent constrained criterion in which the variance of
the return must not exceed a given threshold, V ar(R) ≤ α (Castro et al., 2012). In this
case, the space of safe policies, Γ, is made up of policies for which the variance does not
exceed a threshold, α. This constrained problem is also transformed into an equivalent
unconstrained problem by using penalty methods (Smith et al., 1997). Then, the problem
is solved using standard unconstrained optimization techniques.
Other approaches rely on ergodic MDPs (Hutter, 2002) which guarantee that any state
is reachable from any other state by following a suitable policy. Unfortunately, many risky
domains are not ergodic. For example, our robot helicopter learning to ﬂy cannot recover
on its own after crashing. The space of safe policies, Γ, is restricted to those policies that
preserve ergodicity with some user-speciﬁed probability, α, called the safety level. That is,
only visiting states s so that one can always get back from s to the initial state (Moldovan
and Abbeel, 2011, 2012a). In this case, the authors use plain linear programming formula-
tion after removing the non-linear dependences to solve the constrained MDP eﬃciently. It
is important to note that this constrained criterion is closely related to the recoverable and
value-state concepts described by Ryabko and Hutter. An environment is recoverable if it
is able to forgive initial wrong actions, i.e., after any arbitrary ﬁnite sequence of actions,
the optimal policy is still achievable. Additionally, an environment is value-stable if from
any sequence of k actions, it is possible to return to the optimal level of reward in o(k)
steps; that is, it is not just possible to recover after any sequence of (wrong) actions, but it
is possible to recover fast.
Finally, Abe et al. (2010) proposed a constrained RL algorithm and reported their
experience in an actual deployment of a tax collection optimization system based on their
approach, at New York State Department of Taxation and Finance. In this case, the set of
constraints, C, is made up of legal, business and resource constraints, which are speciﬁc to
the problem under consideration. In contrast to the previous general formulations in which
the constraints are deﬁned as a function of the entire state trajectory, the authors formulate
the constraints as being ﬁxed and known at each learning iteration.
1450

===== PAGE 15 =====

A Comprehensive Survey on Safe Reinforcement Learning
However these approaches have three main drawbacks. First, the correct selection of the
threshold α. Higher values mean that they are too permissive, or conversely, too restrictive.
Second, they do not prevent the fatal consequences in the short term. Finally, these methods
associate the risk to policies in which the return or its variance is greater than a speciﬁed
threshold, which is not suitable for most risk domains.
3.4 Other Optimization Criteria
In the area of ﬁnancial engineering, various risk metrics such as r-squared, beta, Sharpe
ratio or value-at-risk (VaR) have been studied for decision making with a low risk of huge
costs (Mausser and Rosen, 1998; Kashima, 2007; Luenberger, 2013). Castro et al. (2012)
also use the Sharpe ratio criterion, maxπ∈Π Eπ(R)
√
V ar(R). The performance of this crite-
rion is compared with the constrained criterion, V ar(R) ≤ α, and the classic optimization
criterion (Equation 1) in a portfolio management problem where the available investment
options include both liquid and non-liquid assets. The non-liquid asset has some risk of not
being paid (i.e., a default) with a given probability. The policy for the classic criterion is
risky, and yields a higher gain than the policy for the constrained criterion. Interestingly,
maxπ∈Π Eπ(R)
√
V ar(R) resulted in a very risk-averse policy, that almost never invested in
the non-liquid asset. This interesting phenomenon discourages the use of this optimization
criterion. Even the authors suggest that it might be more prudent to consider other risk
measures instead of the max π∈Π Eπ(R)
√
V ar(R). Morimura et al. (2010a,b) focus their
risk-sensitive approach on estimating the density of the returns, which allows them to han-
dle various risk-sensitive criteria. However, the resulting distributional-SARSA-with-CVaR
(or d-SARSA with CVaR) algorithm, has proved eﬀectiveness only in a very simple and
discrete MDP with 14 states.
4. Modifying the Exploration Process
This section describes the methods of the second category of the proposed taxonomy. In this
category, in contrast with the previous one, the optimization criterion remains, but the ex-
ploration process is modiﬁed to consider some form of risk. Classic exploration/exploitation
strategies in RL assume that the agent must explore and learn everything from scratch. In
this framework, the agent is blind to the risk of actions during learning, potentially ending
up in catastrophic states (Geibel and Wysotzki, 2005; Garc´ ıa and Fern´ andez, 2012). The
helicopter hovering control task is one such case involving high risk, since some policies
can crash the helicopter, incurring catastrophic negative reward. Exploration/exploitation
strategies such as ϵ − greedy may even result in constant helicopter crashes (especially
where there is a high probability of random action selection). In addition, random explo-
ration policies waste a signiﬁcant amount of time exploring irrelevant regions of the state
and action spaces in which the optimal policy will never be encountered. This problem
is more pronounced in environments with extremely large and continuous state and ac-
tion spaces. Finally, it is impossible to completely avoid undesirable situations in high-risk
environments without a certain amount of external knowledge (that is, not coming from
interaction between the agent and the system): the use of random exploration would require
an undesirable state to be visited before it can be labeled as undesirable. However, such
visits to undesirable states usually lead to unrecoverable situations or traps (Ryabko and
1451

===== PAGE 16 =====

Garc´ıa and Fern´andez
Hutter) (i.e., the agent is not able to achieve the optimal policy after a sequence of wrong
actions) and may result in damage or injury to the agent, the learning system or external
entities. Consequently, visits to these states should be avoided from the earliest steps of
the learning process. In this paper, we focus on two ways of modifying the exploration
process in order to avoid visits to undesirable states: through the incorporation of external
knowledge or through a directed exploration based on a risk measure. Both approaches are
discussed in detail in the following sections.
4.1 Incorporating External Knowledge
Mitigating the diﬃculties described above, external knowledge (e.g., ﬁnite sets of teacher-
provided examples or demonstrations) can be used in three general ways, either (i) to
provide initial knowledge (i.e., a type of initialization procedure) or (ii) to derive a policy
from a ﬁnite set of examples or (iii) to guide the exploration process through teacher advice.
In the ﬁrst case, the knowledge is used to bootstrap the value function approximation and
lead the agent through the more relevant regions of the space. In the second way, ﬁnite sets
of teacher-provided examples or demonstrations can be used to derive a policy. In these
ways, the learning algorithm is exposed to the most relevant regions of the state and action
spaces from the earliest steps of the learning process, thereby eliminating the time needed
in random exploration for the discovery of these regions.
However, while furnishing the agent with initial knowledge helps to mitigate the prob-
lems associated with random exploration, this initialization alone is not suﬃcient to prevent
the undesirable situations that arise in the subsequent explorations undertaken to improve
learner ability. An additional mechanism is necessary to guide this subsequent exploration
process in such a way that the agent may be kept far away from catastrophic states. So,
in the third case, a teacher is used to provide information when it is considered necessary.
These three ways of incorporating external knowledge are widely discussed in the following
sections. Some of the approaches described here were not created originally as speciﬁc Safe
RL methods, but they have some properties that make them particularly suitable for these
kinds of problem.
4.1.1 Providing Initial Knowledge
The most elementary method for biasing learning is to choose some initialization based
on prior knowledge of the problem. In Driessens and Dˇ zeroski (2004), a bootstrapping
procedure is used for relational RL in which a ﬁnite set of demonstrations are recorded
from a human teacher and later presented to a regression algorithm (Driessens and Dˇ zeroski,
2004). This allows the regression algorithm to build a partial Q-function which can later
be used to guide further exploration of the state space using a Boltzmann exploration
strategy. Smart and Kaelbling also use examples, training runs to bootstrap the Q-learning
approach for their HEDGER algorithm (Smart and Kaelbling, 2000). The initial knowledge
bootstrapped into the Q-learning approach allows the agent to learn more eﬀectively and
helps to reduce the time spent with random actions. Teacher behaviors are also used
as a form of population seeding in neuroevolution approaches (Siebel and Sommer, 2007).
Evolutionary methods are used to optimize the weights of neural networks, but starting from
a prototype network whose weights correspond to a teacher (or baseline policy). Using this
1452

===== PAGE 17 =====

A Comprehensive Survey on Safe Reinforcement Learning
technique, RL Competition helicopter hovering task winners Mart´ ın H. and Lope (2009)
developed an evolutionary RL algorithm in which several teachers are provided in the initial
population. The algorithm restricts crossover and mutation operators, allowing only slight
changes to the policies given by the teachers. Consequently, it facilitates a rapid convergence
of the algorithm to a near-optimal policy, as is the indirect minimization of damage to the
agent. In Koppejan and Whiteson (2009, 2011), neural networks are also evolved, beginning
with one whose weights correspond to the behavior of the teacher. While this approach has
been proven advantageous in numerous applications of evolutionary methods (Hern´ andez-
D´ ıaz et al., 2008; Koppejan and Whiteson, 2009), Koppejan’s algorithm nevertheless seems
somewhat ad-hoc and designed for a specialized set of environments.
Maire (2005) propose an approach for deriving high quality initial value functions from
existing demonstrations by a teacher. The resulting value function constitutes a starting
point for any value function-based RL method. As the initial value function is substan-
tially more informative than a random value function initialization frequently used with RL
methods, the remaining on-line learning process is conducted safer and faster. Song et al.
(2012) also improve the performance of the Q-learning algorithm initializing the Q-values
appropriately. These approaches are used in the Grid-World domain and are able to reduce
drastically the times the agent moves into an obstacle.
Some Transfer Learning (TL) algorithms are also used to initialize a learner in a target
task (Taylor and Stone, 2009). The core idea of transfer is that experience gained in
learning to perform one task can help to improve learning performance in a related, but
diﬀerent, task. Taylor and Stone (2007) train an agent in a source task recording the
agent’s trajectories (i.e., state-action pairs). Then, the agent uses this experience to train
in the target task oﬀ-line before the on-line training begins. These authors also learn an
action-value function in a source task, translate the function into a target task via a hand-
coded inter-task mapping, and then use the transferred function to initialize the target task
agent (Taylor et al., 2007). Despite TL approaches having been shown eﬀective in speeding
up the learning processes, they present two main diﬃculties in their applicability to risky
domains: (i) the knowledge to be reused in the target task requires it to be previously
learned in a source task(s) (which is not always possible to do in a safe manner), and (ii)
it is not always trivial to transfer this knowledge from the source task(s) to the target task
since they could be of a diﬀerent nature.
There is extensive literature on initialization in RL algorithms (Burkov and Chaib-draa,
2007), but their intensive analysis falls outside the scope of this paper since not all of them
are focused to preserving the agent’s safety or avoiding risky or undesirable situations. But
the bias introduced in the learning process and the rapid convergence produced by most of
these algorithms, can ensure their applicability to risky domains. However, this approach is
problematic for two main reasons. First, if the initialization does not provide information for
all important states the agent may end up with a suboptimal policy. Second, the exploration
process following the initial training phase can result in visiting new states for which the
agent has no information on how to act. As a result, the probability of incurring damage or
injury is greatly increased. In addition, the relevance of these methods is highly dependent
on the internal representations used by the agent. If the agent simply maintains a table,
initialization is easy, but if the agent uses a more complex representation, it maybe very
diﬃcult or impossible to initialize the learning algorithm.
1453

===== PAGE 18 =====

Garc´ıa and Fern´andez
4.1.2 Deriving a Policy from a Finite Set of Demonstrations
All approaches falling under this category are framed according to the ﬁeld of Learning
from Demonstration (LfD) (Argall et al., 2009). Highlighting the study by Abbeel and
Ng (2005); Abbeel et al. (2010) based on apprenticeship learning, the approach is made
up of three distinct steps. In the ﬁrst, a teacher demonstrates the task to be learned and
the state-action trajectories of the teacher’s demonstration are recorded. In the second
step, all state-action trajectories seen so far are used to learn a model from the system’s
dynamics. For this model, a (near-)optimal policy is to be found using any reinforcement
learning (RL) algorithm. Finally, the policy obtained should be tested by running it on the
real system. In Tang et al. (2010), an algorithm based on apprenticeship learning is also
presented for automatically-generating trajectories for diﬃcult control tasks. The proposal
is based on the learning of parameterized versions of desired maneuvers from multiple expert
demonstrations. In these approaches, the learner is able to exceed the performance of the
teacher. Despite each approach’s potential strengths and general interest, all are inherently
linked to the information provided in the demonstration data set. As a result, learner
performance is heavily limited by the quality of the teacher’s demonstrations. While one
way to circumvent the diﬃculty and improve performance is by exploring beyond what is
provided in the teacher demonstrations, this again raises the question of how the agent
should act when it encounters a state for which no demonstration exists. One possible
answer to this question is based on the use of teacher advice techniques, as deﬁned below.
4.1.3 Using Teacher Advice
Exploring the environment while avoiding fatal states is critical for learning in domains
where a bad decision can lead the agent to a dangerous situation. In such domains, diﬀer-
ent ways of teacher advice in reinforcement learning has been proposed as a form of safe
exploration (Clouse, 1997; Hans et al., 2008; Geramifard et al., 2013; Garc´ ıa and Fern´ andez,
2012). The guidance provided by a teacher supports the safe exploration in two ways. First,
the teacher can guide the learner in promising parts of the state space where suggested by
the teacher’s policy. This guidance reduces the sample complexity of learning techniques
which is important when dealing with dangerous or high-risk domains. Secondly, the teacher
is able to provide advice (e.g., safe actions) to the learner when either the learner or the
teacher considers it is necessary so as to prevent catastrophic situations.
The idea of a program learning from external advice was ﬁrst proposed in 1959 by
John McCarthy (Mccarthy, 1959). Teacher advice is based on the use of two fundamental
sources of training information: future payoﬀ achieved by taking actions according to a given
policy from a given state (derived from classic exploration in RL), and the advice from a
teacher as regards which action to take next (Utgoﬀ and Clouse, 1991). The objective of
the approaches considered here is to combine these two sources of training information. In
these approaches, a learner agent improves its policy based on the information (i.e., the
advice) provided by a teacher.
Deﬁnition 7 Teacher Advising (VN and Ravindran, 2011) . Any external entity
which is able to provide an input to the control algorithm that could be used by the agent to
take decisions and modify the progress of its exploration.
1454

===== PAGE 19 =====

A Comprehensive Survey on Safe Reinforcement Learning
Figure 3: General Teacher-Learner Agent Interaction Scheme.
Figure 3 details such an interaction scheme between the teacher and the learner agent.
In every time step, the learner agent perceives the state, chooses the action to perform, and
receives a reward as in the classic RL interaction. In this framework, the teacher generally
observes the same state as the learner and either the learner or the teacher determines when
it is appropriate for the teacher to give an advice. However, the state observed by the agent,
state, and the teacher, state′, could be diﬀerent if they have diﬀerent sensing mechanisms
(e.g., a robot learner’s camera will not detect state changes in the same way as a human
teacher’s eyes) (Argall et al., 2009). Additionally, the nature of the advice can have various
forms: a single action that the learner carries out at that time (Clouse and Utgoﬀ, 1992;
Clouse, 1997; Garc´ ıa and Fern´ andez, 2012); a complete sequence of actions that the learner
agent replays internally (Lin, 1992; Driessens and Dˇ zeroski, 2004); reward used to judge the
agent’s behavior interactively (Thomaz and Breazeal, 2006; Knox and Stone, 2009, 2010;
Knox et al., 2011); a set of actions from which the agent has to select one randomly or
greedily (Thomaz and Breazeal, 2006; Cetina, 2008).
The general framework of teacher’s advice includes ﬁve main steps (Philip Klahr Hayes-
Roth and Mostow., 1981): (i) requesting or receiving the advise; (ii) converting advice into
a usable form; (iii) integrating the reformulated advice into the agent’s knowledge base; and
(iv) judging the value of advice. In this survey, we focus on step one to classify the diﬀerent
approaches of this trend. Thus, there are two main categories of algorithms: the learner
agent asks for advice from the teacher when it needs to, the teacher provides advice to the
learner agent when it is necessary.
4.1.3.1 The Learner Agent Asks for Advice
In this approach, the learner agent poses a conﬁdence parameter and when this conﬁ-
dence in a state is low, the learner agent asks for advice from the teacher. Typically, this
advice corresponds to the action that the teacher would carry out if it were in the place of
the learner agent in the current state. In case of advice, the learner agent assimilates the
teacher’s action by ﬁrst performing the action (as the learner itself selected it), and later
receiving the corresponding reward. This reward is used to update the policy using any RL
1455

===== PAGE 20 =====

Garc´ıa and Fern´andez
algorithm. These teacher-advising algorithms are called Ask for help algorithms (Clouse,
1997). In the original Ask for help approach, Clouse (1997) uses the conﬁdence parameter
in two diﬀerent strategies: uniform asking strategy and uncertainty asking strategy. In the
ﬁrst, the learner’s request is spread uniformly throughout the learning process. In this case,
this parameter establishes the percentage of time steps in which the learner requests help.
The second is based on the learner agent’s uncertainty about its current action selection.
In this case, Clouse establishes that the agent is unsure about the action to choose when
all the actions in the current learning step have similar Q-values; i.e., if the minimum and
maximum Q-values are very similar (which is speciﬁed by the conﬁdence parameter), the
learner agent asks for advice. However, this interval-estimation measure between the high-
est and lowest Q-values produces counterintuitive results in some domains, such the maze
domain. In this domain, the true Q-values of actions for each state are very similar since
the maze states are highly connected. Interval estimation is therefore not a stable measure
of conﬁdence for maze-like domains.
Hans et al. (2008) and Garc´ ıa and Fern´ andez (2011, 2012); Garc´ ıa et al. (2013) use this
conﬁdence parameter to detect risky situations. In this case, the concept of risk is based on
the deﬁnition of fatal transitions or unknown states. Hans et al. (2008) consider a transition
to be fatal if the corresponding reward is less than a given threshold τ, and an action a
to be unsafe in a given state s if it leads to a fatal transition. In this work, the authors
also build the teacher’s policy with an altered Bellman optimality equation that does not
maximize the return, but the minimal reward to come. The learner agent tries to explore
all actions considered safe for all states using the teacher policy or previously identiﬁed safe
actions in a level-based exploration strategy, which requires storing large amounts of tuples.
Garc´ ıa and Fern´ andez (2011, 2012); Garc´ ıa et al. (2013) present a new deﬁnition of risk
based on unknown and known space, and that reﬂects the author’s intuition as to when
human learners require advice. Certainly, humans beneﬁt from help when they are in novel
or unknown situations. The authors use a case-based approach to detect such situations.
Traditionally, case-based approaches use a density threshold θ in order to determine when
a new case should be added to the memory. When the distance of the nearest neighbor
to the query state is greater than θ, a new case is added. Garc´ ıa and Fern´ andez (2011,
2012) propose the PI-SRL algorithm in which a risk function, ϱB(s), measures the risk
of a state in terms of its similarity to previously visited (and secure) states in a case
base, B = {c1 . . . , cn}. Every case ci consists of a state-action pair ( si, ai) the agent has
experienced in the past and with an associated valueV (si). When the distance to the closest
state in the case base is larger than a parameter θ, the risk is maximum, while the risk is
minimal if this distance is less than θ. Therefore, in that work, the risk function is deﬁned as
a step function. However, to deﬁne the risk function in such a way demonstrates that it may
still produce damage in the learning agent. The reason is that to follow the teacher’s advice
only when the distance to the closest known state is larger than θ may be too late. On the
other hand, one would expect that the risk function is progressive. Therefore, while the limit
of θ is approaching, the risk should start to grow, and the learning agent could start to use
the teacher’s advice. In a further work, Garc´ ıa et al. (2013) propose the use of a progressive
risk function that determines the probability of following the teacher advice. The integration
of this advice together with the π-reuse exploration strategy (Fern´ andez and Veloso, 2006;
Fern´ andez et al., 2010) results in the PR-SRL algorithm (Garc´ ıa et al., 2013). Theπ-reuse
1456

===== PAGE 21 =====

A Comprehensive Survey on Safe Reinforcement Learning
exploration strategy allows the agent to use a past policy, Πpast, with probability φ, explores
with probability ϵ, and exploits the current policy, Πnew, with probability 1 − φ − ϵ. In the
PR-SRL algorithm the past policy Πpast is replaced by the teacher policy, the new policy to
be learned Πnew is replaced by the case base policy in B, and the parameter ψ is replaced
by a sigmoid risk function, ϱB(s), which computes the probability of teacher’s advice.
Hailu and Sommer (1998) also associates the concept of risk to the concept of distance
to distinguish novel situations. In this case, the learner agent consists of a feedforward
neural network made up of RBF neurons in the input layer and a stochastic neuron in the
output layer. Each neuron represents a localized receptive ﬁeld of width ∑that covers a
hyper-sphere of the input space. The learner agent has no neurons at the beginning of the
learning process. At this point, the robot perceives a new state s, and it cannot generalize
the situation. Therefore, it invokes the teacher which sends its action to the learner. The
learner receives the action and adds a neuron. When a new state is perceived, the learner
identiﬁes the ﬁrst winning neuron closest to the state perceived. If the distance of the
winning neuron is larger than ∑, the state is regarded as novel and the learner invokes the
teacher and adds a neuron that generalized the new situation perceived. In this way, the
learner grows gradually, thus increasing its competence.
Instead, Geramifard et al. (2011); Geramifard (2012); Geramifard et al. (2013) assume
the presence of a function named safe: S ×A → {0, 1} that returns true if the carrying out of
action a at state s will result in a catastrophic outcome and false otherwise. At every time
step, if the learner agent considers the action to be safe, it will be carried out during the next
step, otherwise the learner invokes the teacher’s action which is assumed to be safe. The safe
function is based on the existence of a constrained function: S → { 0, 1}, which indicates
whether being in a particular state is allowed or not. Risk is deﬁned as the probability of
visiting any of the constrained states. However, this approach presents two main drawbacks:
(i) modeling the constrained function correctly, and (ii) it assumes the system model is
known or partially known although it is only used for risk analysis. Jessica Vleugel and
Gelens (2011) proposed an approach where the unsafe states are previously labeled. In this
method, the learner agent asks for advice when it reaches a previously labeled unsafe state.
Finally, although more related to learning from demonstration, Chernova and Veloso
(2009) also use the conﬁdence parameter to select between agent autonomy and a request
for a demonstration based on the measure of action-selection conﬁdence returned by a
classiﬁer. Conﬁdence below a given threshold indicates that the agent is uncertain about
which action to take, so it seeks help from the teacher in the form of a demonstration,
improving the policy and increasing the conﬁdences for future similar states.
4.1.3.2 The Teacher Provides Advice
In the approaches grouped in this trend, the teacher provides actions or information
whenever the teacher feels its help is necessary. Therefore in all these approaches, an
explicit mechanism in the learner agent to recognize (and express) its need for advice is not
necessary. Therefore, a new open question arises namely what is the best time for a teacher
to provide information. Clouse and Utgoﬀ (1992) add a simple interface to a RL algorithm to
allow a human teacher to interact with the learner agent during the learning process. In this
work, the teacher monitors the learner’s behavior and provides an action when it considers
1457

===== PAGE 22 =====

Garc´ıa and Fern´andez
it necessary. This action is supposed to be the correct choice to be made in that state.
Otherwise, the learner agent takes its own action based on its developing policy. Maclin
and Shavlik (1996) use a similar approach in their RATLE algorithm, where a teacher at
any point can interrupt the agent learning execution and types its advice using simple IF-
THEN rules and more complex rules involving multiple steps. Thomaz and Breazeal (2006,
2008) also introduce an interface between the human teacher and the learner agent. The
human teacher advises the agent in two ways: using an interactive reward interface and
sending human advice messages. Through the ﬁrst, the teacher introduces a reward signal
r ∈ [−1, 1] for each step of the learning process. The human teacher receives visual feedback
enabling him/her to tune the reward signal before sending it to the agent. Through the
second, the agent begins each iteration of the learning loop by pausing to allow the teacher
time to introduce advice messages (1.5 seconds). If advice messages are received, the agent
will choose randomly between the set of actions derived from these messages. Otherwise, the
agent chooses randomly between the set of actions with the highest Q-values. In a similar
way, Suay and Chernova (2011) also use a teacher to provide rewards and guidance to an
Aldebaran Nao humanoid robot. Instead, Vidal et al. (2013) presents a learning algorithm
in which the reinforcement comes from a human teacher that is seeing what the robot does.
This teacher is able to punish the robot by simply pressing a button on a wireless joystick.
When the teacher presses the button to give the robot negative reinforcement, the robot
learns from it and transfers the control to the teacher, so that the teacher will be able to
move the robot and place it in a suitable position to go on learning. Once this manual
control is over, the teacher will press a second button to continue the learning process. In
all these approaches, the teacher decides when to provide information based on him/her
own feelings (i.e., when the teacher deems it necessary), but there is no metric or rule as to
the best time for to do it. Additionally, using the constant monitoring of the learner agent
by the teacher, it might not be desirable in practice due to the time or cost implications.
Maclin et al. (2005b) implement the advice as a set of rules provided by a teacher.
When a rule applies (i.e., the LHS is satisﬁed) it is used to say the Q-value for some action
should be high or low. The experiments are conducted using the keep away domain, and
an example of the rule suggests the keeper with the ball should hold it when the nearest
taker is at least 8 metres away (i.e., Q(hold) ≥ high). In a later work, Maclin et al. (2005a)
extends the previous approach to recommend that some action is preferred over another
in a speciﬁed set of states. Therefore, the teacher is giving advice on policies rather than
Q-values, which is a more natural way for humans to present advice (e.g., when the nearest
taker is at least 8 meters, holding the ball is preferred to passing it). Similarly, Torrey
et al. (2005) also used a set of rules, but these rules were learned in a previous related
task using inductive logic programming following a transfer learning approach (Taylor and
Stone, 2009). The user can also add supplementary teacher advice on the learned rules
before the learning process begins. During the learning process, the learner agent receives
the teacher’s advice and the agent can follow it, reﬁne it, or ignore it according to its value.
Walsh et al. (2011) use a teacher that analyzes the return of the learner agent for each
episode. This return provides enough information for the teacher to decide whether or not
to provide a demonstration. For each episode, if the return of the agent is lower than a
certain measurement, the teacher decides to show a demonstration of that episode starting
1458

===== PAGE 23 =====

A Comprehensive Survey on Safe Reinforcement Learning
at the same initial state. In this way, the agent learns concepts that it cannot eﬃciently
learn on its own.
4.1.3.3 Other Approaches
In other approaches, the control of the teacher and the learner agent in the advice-taking
interaction is not pre-deﬁned. Rosenstein and Barto (2002, 2004) present a supervised RL
algorithm that computes a composite action that is a weighted average of the action sug-
gested by the teacher (aT ) and the exploratory action suggested by the evaluation function
(aE) using
a = kaE + (1 − k)aT (12)
In Equation 12, aE = aA + N(0, σ), where aA is the action derived from the policy of
the agent, πA(s), for a given state s; and N(0, σ) is a normal distribution. The parameter
k can be used to interpolate between an ask for help approach and an approach in which
the teacher has the main role. Therefore, k determines the level of control, or autonomy,
on the parts of the learner agent and the teacher. On the one hand, the learner agent
can set k = 1 if it is fully conﬁdence about the action to be taken. Instead, it can set
the value of k close to 0 whenever it needs help from its teacher obtaining an ask for help
approach (Section 4.1.3.1). On the other hand, the teacher can set k = 0 whenever it loses
conﬁdence in the autonomous behavior of the learner agent similarly to the approaches in
Section 4.1.3.2. It is important to note that the proposed way of combining the action
suggested by the teacher and the exploratory action is originally conceived for continuous
action spaces but it could be extended to a discrete action space as well, by considering
distributions over actions.
Kuhlmann et al. (2004) also computes an action using the suggestions of the teacher
and the agent. In this work, the teacher generates values for the possible actions in the
current world state. It is implemented as a set of rules. If a rule applies, the corresponding
action value is increased or decreased by a constant amount. The values generated by the
teacher are added to those generated by the learning agent. The ﬁnal action selected is the
action with the greatest ﬁnal composite value. On the other hand, Judah et al. (2010) use
a teacher that is allowed to observe the execution of the agent’s current policy and then
scroll back and forth along the trajectory and mark any of the available actions in any state
as good or bad. The learner agent uses these suggestions and the trajectories generated by
itself to compose the agent policy that maximizes the return in the environment. Moreno
et al. (2004), by extending the approach proposed by Iglesias et al. (1998b,a), computes
an action as the combination of the actions suggested by diﬀerent teachers. At every time
step, each teacher produces a vector of utilities u which contains a value u(s, ai) ∈ [0, 1]
for each action ai that it is possible to carry out in the current state s. Then the teacher’s
vectors are amalgamated into a one single vector, w(a). This vector and an exploratory
vector, e(a), computed as e(a) = 1 − w(a), are used to draw up a ﬁnal decision vector which
indicates which actions are the most suitable for the current state.
Torrey and Taylor (2012) present an algorithm in which the advice probability depends
on the relationship between the learner agent’s conﬁdence and the teacher’s conﬁdence. In
states where the teacher has much greater conﬁdence than that of the student, it gives
advice with a greater probability. As the agent’s conﬁdence in a state grows, the advice
1459

===== PAGE 24 =====

Garc´ıa and Fern´andez
probability decreases. Other approaches are based on interleaving episodes carried out by a
teacher with normal exploration episodes. This mixture of teacher and normal exploration
makes it easier for the RL algorithms to distinguish between beneﬁcial and poor or unsafe
actions. Lin (1991, 1992) use two diﬀerent interleaving strategies. In the ﬁrst, after each
complete episode, the learner agent replays n demonstrations chosen randomly from the
most recent 100 experienced demonstrations, with recent lessons exponentially more likely
to be chosen. In the second, after each complete episode, the agent also stochastically
chooses already taught demonstrations for replay. Driessens and Dˇ zeroski (2004) also use an
interleaving strategy and compares its inﬂuence when it is supplied at diﬀerent frequencies.
In other works the advice takes the form of a reward. In this case, the teacher judges
the quality of the agent’s behavior sending a feedback signal that can be mapped onto a
scalar value (e.g. by pressing a button or verbal feedback of “good” and “bad”) (Thomaz
and Breazeal, 2006; Knox and Stone, 2009). In contrast to RL, a learner agent seeks to
directly maximize the short-term reinforcement given by the teacher. Other works combine
the reward function of the MDP and that provided by the teacher (Knox and Stone, 2010;
Knox et al., 2011).
4.2 Risk-directed Exploration
In this trend the exploration process is carried out by taking into account a deﬁned risk met-
ric. Gehring and Precup (2013) deﬁnes a risk metric based on the notion of controllability.
If a particular state (or state-action pair) yields a considerable variability in the temporal-
diﬀerence error signal, it is less controllable. The authors compute the controllability of a
state-action pair as deﬁned in
C(st, at) ← C(st, at) − α′(|δt| + C(st, at)) (13)
The exploration algorithm uses controllability as an exploration bonus, picking actions
greedily according to Q(st, at)+ wC(st, at). In this way, the agent is encouraged to seek con-
trollable regions of the environment. This approach is successfully applied to the helicopter
hovering control domain (Garc´ ıa and Fern´ andez, 2012) used in the RL Competition. Law
(2005) uses a risk metric to guide the exploration process. In this case, the measurement
of risk for a particular action in a given state is the weighted sum of the entropy (i.e., the
stochasticity of the outcomes of a given action in a given state) and normalized expected
return of that action. The risk measure of an action, U(s, a), is combined with the action
value to form the risk-adjusted utility of an action, i.e., p(1 − U(st, at)) + (1 − p)Q(st, at)
where p ∈ [0, 1]. The ﬁrst term measures the safety value of an action, while the second
term measures the long term utility of that action. The risk-adjusted utility is replaced
in the Boltzmann function instead of the Q-values in order to safely guide the exploration
process. However, the main drawback of these approaches is that the mechanism of risk
avoidance is achieved by learning the risk values of actions during learning, i.e., when the
functions C(st, at) and U(st, at) are correctly approximated. But it would be desirable to
prevent risk situations from the early steps in the learning process.
Finally, it is important to note that the approaches considered here are similar in spirit
to those in section 3.3. As an example, if the controllability was added as a constraint,
then it becomes a constrained optimization criterion and, hence, this approach should be
1460

===== PAGE 25 =====

A Comprehensive Survey on Safe Reinforcement Learning
included in Section 3.3. However, we would obtain a diﬀerent algorithm with diﬀerent
results. The approaches considered here only introduce a bias in the exploration process
without satisfying hard constraints or constraints with a ﬁxed probability of violation.
Instead, the approaches in Section 3.3 must fulﬁll all the given constraints (although it is
considered a ﬁxed probability of constraint violation).
5. Discussion and Open Issues
In this Section, we complete the study of the techniques surveyed in this paper by classifying
them across diﬀerent dimensions. Additionally, we summarize the main advantages and
drawbacks for each group of techniques in order to deﬁne future work directions.
5.1 Characterization of Safe RL Algorithms
As highlighted in the previous sections, current approaches to Safe RL have been designed
to address a wide variety of problems where the risk considered and its detection have a large
variety of forms. Table 2 analyzes most of the surveyed approaches across four dimensions.
5.1.1 Allowed Learner
We distinguish various RL approaches used in Safe RL. The model free methods such as
Q-Learning (Sutton and Barto, 1998) which learn by backing up experienced rewards over
time. The model-based methods which attempt to estimate the true model of the environ-
ment by interacting with it. The policy search methods which directly modify a policy over
time to increase the expected long-term reward by using search or other optimization tech-
niques. Finally, the relational RL methods which use a diﬀerent state/action representation
(relational or ﬁrst-order language).
Table 2 shows that most of the approaches correspond to model-free RL algorithms.
Model-based approaches are also used but few such methods handle continuous or large
state and action spaces (Abbeel and Ng, 2005) and they generally have trouble scaling to
tasks with many state and action variables due to the curse of dimensionality. Model-based
approaches demand run exploration policies until they have an accurate model of the entire
MDP (or at least the reachable parts of it). This makes many model-based approaches
require exhaustive exploration that can take an undesirably long time for complex systems.
Additionally, an aggressive exploration policy in order to build an accurate model can lead to
catastrophic consequences. Therefore, model-based approaches suﬀer a similar exploration
problem as model-free approaches, but in this case the question is: how can we safely explore
the relevant parts of the state/action spaces to build up a suﬃciently accurate dynamics
model from which derive a good policy? Abbeel (2008) oﬀers a solution to these problems
by learning a dynamics model from teacher demonstrations. Policy search and Relational
RL methods are also identiﬁed as techniques that can be applied to risky domains, but
usually refer to the use of bootstrapping approaches.
5.1.2 Space Complexity
The column entitled by Space in Table 2 describes the complexity of the state and action
spaces of the domains where the method has been used. The S refers to continuous or large
1461

===== PAGE 26 =====

Garc´ıa and Fern´andez
Citation Allowed Learner Spaces Risk Exploration
Modifying the Optimization Criterion: Section 3
Worst Case Criterion: Section 3.1
Heger (1994b) model free s/a Var greedy
Gaskett (2003) model free s/a Var greedy
Risk-Sensitive Criterion: Section 3.2
Borkar (2002) model free s/a Var greedy
Mihatsch and Neuneier (2002) model free S/a TD-error ϵ−greedy
Campos and Langlois (2003) model free S/a TD-error ϵ−greedy
Geibel and Wysotzki (2005) model free S/a error states greedy
Constrained Criterion: Section 3.3
Geibel (2006) model free s/a E(R)≥α greedy
Castro et al. (2012) model free S/A Var (R)≤α softmax
Moldovan and Abbeel (2011, 2012a) model based s/a ergodicity bonuses
Abe et al. (2010) model free s/a ad-hoc constraints greedy
Modifying the Exploration Process: Section 4
Providing Initial Knowledge: Section 4.1.1
Driessens and Dˇ zeroski (2004) relational S/a initial exploration softmax
Smart and Kaelbling (2000) model free S/A initial exploration gaussian
Mart´ ın H. and Lope (2009) policy search S/A initial exploration evolving NN
Koppejan and Whiteson (2011) policy search S/A initial exploration evolving NN
Maire (2005) model free s/a initial exploration greedy
Deriving a Policy from a Finite Set of Demonstrations: Section 4.1.2
Abbeel and Ng (2005) model based S/A accurate model greedy
Tang et al. (2010) model based S/A accurate model greedy
Using Teacher Advice: Section 4.1.3
Clouse (1997) model free S/a similar Q−values softmax
Hans et al. (2008) model free s/a fatal transitions level-based
Garc´ ıa et al. (2013) model free S/A unknown states gaussian
Geramifard (2012) model based S/A constrained states softmax
Clouse and Utgoﬀ (1992) model free s/a human ϵ−greedy
Maclin and Shavlik (1996) model free s/a human softmax
Thomaz and Breazeal (2006, 2008) model free S/a human softmax
Walsh et al. (2011) model based s/a E(R)≤α Rmax
Rosenstein and Barto (2002, 2004) model free S/A agent/teacher conﬁdence gaussian
Kuhlmann et al. (2004) model free S/a human ϵ−greedy
Torrey and Taylor (2012) model free S/a agent/teacher conﬁdence ϵ−greedy
Risk-directed Exploration: Section 4.2
Gehring and Precup (2013) model free S/a TD-error risk directed
Law (2005) model based s/a entropy and E(R) risk directed
Table 2: This table lists most of the Safe RL methods discussed in this survey and classiﬁes
each in terms of four dimensions.
1462

===== PAGE 27 =====

A Comprehensive Survey on Safe Reinforcement Learning
state space, and s to discrete and small state space. The same interpretation can be applied
analogously to A and a in the case of the action space. In this way, S/a means that the
method has been applied to domains with continuous or large state space and discrete and
small action space.
Most of the research on RL has studied solutions to ﬁnite MDPs. On the other hand,
learning in real-world environments requires handling with continuous state and action
spaces. While several studies have focused on problems with continuous states, little at-
tention has been paid to tasks involving continuous actions. These conclusions can also be
obtained for Safe RL from Table 2 where most of the approaches address ﬁnite MDPs (Heger,
1994a; Gaskett, 2003; Moldovan and Abbeel, 2012a) and problems with continuous or
large state spaces (Mihatsch and Neuneier, 2002; Geibel and Wysotzki, 2005; Thomaz and
Breazeal, 2008), and much fewer approaches address problems with continuous or large
state and action spaces (Abbeel et al., 2009; Garc´ ıa and Fern´ andez, 2012).
5.1.3 Risk
The forms of risk considered in this survey are also listed in Table 2. These forms are
related to the variance of the return or its worst possible outcome (entitled Var in Table 2),
to the temporal diﬀerences (entitled TD-error), to error states, to constraints related to
the expected return (entitled by E(R) ≥ α or E(R) ≤ α) or the variance of the return
(entitled V ar(R) ≤ α), to the ergodicity concept, to the eﬀects of initial exploration in early
stages in unknown environments (entitled initial exploration), to the obtaining of accurate
models used later to derive a policy (entitled accurate model), to similar Q-values, to fatal
transitions, to unknown states , to human decisions which determine what is considered a
risk situation and when to provide help (entitled human), and to the degree of conﬁdence
both the teacher and the agent (denoted by agent/teacher conﬁdence).
Table 2 shows the wide variety of forms of risk considered in the literature. This makes
the drawing up of a benchmark problem diﬃcult, or the identiﬁcation of an environment
to test diﬀerent notions of risk. That is, in most cases, the approaches have diﬀerent safety
objectives and, hence, they result in diﬀerent safe policies. For instance, the ˆQ − Learning
algorithm by Heger (1994b) leads to a safe policy completely diﬀerent from that obtained by
the method proposed by Garc´ ıa and Fern´ andez (2012). The applicability of one or another
depends on the particular domain we are considering, and the type of risk it involves.
Additionally, it is important to note that, in some cases, the risk metric selected places
restrictions on which RL algorithm is used. For instance, the risk related to the ergodicity
requires the model of the MDP to be known or learned.
5.1.4 Exploration
Table 2 also describes the exploration/exploitation strategy used for action selection. The
greedy strategy is referred to the ϵ − greedy strategy where the ϵ is ﬁxed at 0. For in-
stance, Gaskett (2003) applies this exploration strategy and uses the inherent stochasticity
of the environment to explore eﬃciently. In the classic ϵ − greedy action selection strategy
the agent selects a random action with chance ϵ and the current best action with proba-
bility 1 − ϵ. In softmax action selection, the action probabilities are ranked according to
their value estimates. The gaussian exploration is related to continuous action spaces and
1463

===== PAGE 28 =====

Garc´ıa and Fern´andez
at every moment the action is selected by sampling from a Gaussian distribution with the
mean at the current best action. The evolution of Neural Networks (NN) are used in policy
search methods to explore around the policy space. In the level-based exploration proposed
by Hans et al. (2008), the agent tries to explore all actions considered safe (i.e., it does not
lead to a fatal transition) for each state gradually. The exploration bonuses adds a bonus
to states with higher potential of learning (Baranes and Oudeyer, 2009), or with higher
uncertainty (Brafman and Tennenholtz, 2003). Regarding the latter, the Rmax exploration
is related to model-based approaches and it divides states into two groups, known and un-
known states, and focuses on reaching unknown states by assigning them maximum possible
values (Brafman and Tennenholtz, 2003). Finally, the risk directed exploration uses a risk
metric to guide the exploration process.
As the most widely used methods are model free in discrete and small action space, the
exploration strategies most commonly used are ϵ − greedy and softmax. However, due to
their random component of action selection, there is a certain chance of exploring dangerous
or undesirable states. This chance aﬀects the approaches diﬀerently using these strategies in
Section 3 and Section 4. Most of the approaches in Section 3 are not interested in obtaining
a safe exploration during the learning process; they are more interested in obtaining a safe
policy at the end (Heger, 1994b; Gaskett, 2003; Mihatsch and Neuneier, 2002; Campos and
Langlois, 2003). Therefore, the random component of these strategies is not so relevant for
these approaches. In the approaches in Section 3.3 the use of these exploration strategies
is limited to the space considered safe (i.e., that fulﬁlls the constraints) (Geibel, 2006;
Castro et al., 2012; Abe et al., 2010), which limits visiting undesirable regions despite this
random component. Instead, most of the approaches in Section 4 address the problem
of safe exploration using these exploration strategies. The approaches in Section 4.1.1
introduce an initial bias into the exploration space which mitigate (but do not prevent) the
number of visits to undesirable states that produce these exploration strategies (Driessens
and Dˇ zeroski, 2004; Maire, 2005). The approaches in Section 4.1.2 derive a model from
a ﬁnite set of demonstrations, and then use this model to derive a policy greedily in an
oﬀ-line and, hence, safe manner (Abbeel et al., 2009; Tang et al., 2010). The approaches in
Section 4.1.3 combine the advice provided by the teacher with these exploration strategies
to produce a safe exploration process (Clouse, 1997; Maclin et al., 2005a; Thomaz and
Breazeal, 2006, 2008; Torrey and Taylor, 2012). For instance, the softmax exploration is
used by Thomaz and Breazeal (2008) to select an action if no advice is introduced by the
human. Otherwise, it selects a random action from among that derived from the advice
introduced.
Other exploration strategies based on exploration bonuses such as Rmax are related to
the use of model-based algorithms (Walsh et al., 2011; Moldovan and Abbeel, 2012a). This
exploration technique was ﬁrst presented for ﬁnite MDPs (Brafman and Tennenholtz, 2003),
but also there are versions for continuous state space where the number of samples required
to learn an accurate model increases as the number of dimensions of the space grows (Nouri,
2011). Moldovan and Abbeel (2012a) use an adapted version of Rmax where the exploration
bonus of moving between two states is proportional to the number of neighboring unknown
states that would be uncovered as a result of the move. It is important to note that Rmax
exploration by itself may be considered unsafe since it is encouraged to explore areas of
unknown space, and other authors establish a direct relationship between the risk and the
1464

===== PAGE 29 =====

A Comprehensive Survey on Safe Reinforcement Learning
unknown concept (Garc´ ıa and Fern´ andez, 2012). However, Moldovan and Abbeel (2012a)
use this exploration method to explore from among the policies whose preserve theergodicity
and are considered safe.
The gaussian exploration also introduces a random component in the algorithms pro-
posed by Garc´ ıa and Fern´ andez (2012) and Smart and Kaelbling (2000). As regards the
former, when an unknown state is found, the action is carried out by the teacher, other-
wise, small amounts of Gaussian noise are randomly added to the greedy actions of the
current policy. This ensures a safe exploration. As regards the latter, at the beginning of
the learning process, the gaussian noise is added to greedy actions derived from a policy
previously bootstrapped by teacher demonstrations. Other approaches uses a risk metric to
direct the safe exploration based on the temporal diﬀerences (Gehring and Precup, 2013) or
the weighted sum of an entropy measurement and the expected return (Law, 2005). Hans
et al. (2008) uses a level-based exploration approach where the safe exploration is carried
out gradually by exploring all the considered safe actions for each state. This exploration
approach seems suitable for ﬁnite MDPs, but in MDPs with large state and action spaces,
this exhaustive exploration is computationally intractable. Finally, the safe exploration
conducted by Mart´ ın H. and Lope (2009) and Koppejan and Whiteson (2011) is due to
the population seeding of the initial population which biases the subsequent exploratory
process.
5.2 Discussion
Table 3 summarizes the main advantages and drawbacks of the approaches surveyed in
this paper. Attending to the main advantages and drawbacks identiﬁed for each approach,
we believe that there are several criteria that must be analyzed when developing Safe RL
algorithms and risk metrics.
5.2.1 Selection of the Risk Metric
The algorithms based on the variance of the return (Sato et al., 2002; Borkar, 2002; Osogami,
2012) or its worst possible outcome (Heger, 1994b; Coraluppi, 1997) are not generalizable
to problems in which a policy with a small variance can produce a large risk. To clarify this
statement, we have reproduced the example set out by Geibel and Wysotzki (Geibel and
Wysotzki, 2005). The example is a grid-world problem in which there are error states (i.e.,
undesirable or dangerous situations), and two goal states (one of them is placed next to the
error state, and the other in a safer part of the state space). This grid-world is detailed in
Figure 4.
The agent is able to move North, South, East, or West. With a probability of 0.21,
the agent is not transported to the desired direction but to one of the three remaining
directions. The agent receives a reward of 1 if it enters a goal state and a reward of 0 in
every other case. There is no explicit negative reward for entering an error state, but when
the agent enters it, the learning episode ends. In this domain, we found that a policy leading
to the error states as fast as possible does not have a higher variance than one that reaches
the goal states as fast as possible. Therefore, a policy with a small variance can therefore
have a large risk, because this policy can lead the agent to error states. Additionally, we
can see that all policies have the same worst case outcome and, hence, this optimization
1465

===== PAGE 30 =====

Garc´ıa and Fern´andez
Advantages Drawbacks
Modifying the Optimization Criterion: Section 3
Worst Case Criterion: Section 3.1
• Useful when avoiding rare occurrences of large
negative return is imperative
• Overly pessimistic
• Variance of the return not generalizable to ar-
bitrary domains
• The true long term utility of the actions are
lost
• Not detect risky situations from the early steps
Risk-Sensitive Criterion: Section 3.2
• Easy switch between risk-averse and risk-
seeking behavior
• Detect long-term risk situations
• If a conservative criterion is used, the policy
may be overly pessimistic
• The true long term utility of the actions are
lost
• Not detect risky situations from the early steps
Constrained Criterion: Section 3.3
• Intuitively it seems a natural solution to the
problem of safe exploration: the exploration is
carried out only in the region of space consid-
ered safe (i.e., that fulﬁlls the constraints)
• Many of these problems are computationally
intractable, which diﬃcult the formulation of
RL algorithms
• Correct selection of the parameter constraints
• Constraints related to the return or its variance
are not generalizable to arbitrary domains
Modifying the Exploration Process: Section 4
Providing Initial Knowledge: Section 4.1.1
• Bootstrap the value function approximation
and lead the agent through the more relevant
regions of the space from the earliest steps of
the learning process
• Bias introduced may produce suboptimal poli-
cies
• Exploration process following the initial train-
ing phase can result in visiting catastrophic
states
• Diﬃcult initialization in complex structures
Deriving a Policy from a Finite set of Demonstrations: Section 4.1.2
• The learning algorithm derives a policy from a
ﬁnite set of demonstrations in an oﬀ-line and,
hence, safe manner
• Learner performance is heavily limited by the
quality of the teacher’s demonstrations
• How the agent should act when it encounters
a state for which no demonstration exists?
Using Teacher Advice: Section 4.1.3
• Guide the exploration process keeping the
agent far away from catastrophic states from
the earliest steps of the learning process
• In ask for help approaches
– Automatic detection of risk and request
for advice when needed
– Generalizable mechanisms of risk detec-
tion
• In ask for help approaches
– Detect short term risk situations but not
long term
• In teacher provides advices approaches:
– Teacher decides when to provide infor-
mation based on its own feelings
– Constant monitoring of the learner
agent by the teacher might not be de-
sirable in practice
Risk-directed Exploration: Section 4.2
• Detect long-term risk situations • Not detect risky situations from the early steps
Table 3: This table lists the main advantages and drawbacks of the Safe RL methods dis-
cussed in this survey.
1466

===== PAGE 31 =====

A Comprehensive Survey on Safe Reinforcement Learning
Figure 4: (a) The grid-world domain. (b) The minimum risk policy computed by Geibel
and Wysotzki (Geibel and Wysotzki, 2005).
criterion is also unsuitable for this kind of risky domain. Accordingly, the variance or the
worst-outcome criterion may not be generalizable to any risky domain.
The risk metric considered should be easily generalizable to any risky domain and be
independent of the nature of the task. The risk based on the level of knowledge of a
particular state is an example of generalizable risk metric (Hailu and Sommer, 1998; Garc´ ıa
and Fern´ andez, 2012; Chernova and Veloso, 2009; Torrey and Taylor, 2012). This level of
knowledge about a state can be based on the distance between the known and the unknown
space (Hailu and Sommer, 1998; Garc´ ıa and Fern´ andez, 2012), on the diﬀerence between
the highest and lowest Q-values (Clouse, 1997), or on the number of times an agent has
made a non-trivial Q-value update in a state (Torrey and Taylor, 2012). In this sense,
other knowledge level metrics in a state proposed in the literature can be used in Safe RL
to identify potentially catastrophic situations (e.g., those based on the number of times an
agent visits a state (Kearns and Singh, 2002), or on the knownness criterion (Nouri and
Littman, 2008). The study of risk metrics easily generalizable to arbitrary domains is still
an open issue in Safe RL.
5.2.2 Selection of the Optimization Criterion
We distinguish ﬁve possible situations based on two criteria: (i) the kind of optimization
criterion (long term optimization of risk or risk-neutral), and (ii) the kind of risk detection
(immediate and/or long term risk detection).
• Long term optimization of risk. In this case, we are interested in maximizing a long
term measurement which considers some form of risk. This is common to most of the
works reviewed in Section 3 where the risk-averse behavior is induced by transform-
ing the classic optimization criterion of RL by introducing a risk metric. However, it
seems diﬃcult to ﬁnd an optimization objective which correctly models our intuition
of risk awareness. In Section 3.1, most of the approaches are updated based on a
conservative criterion and the resulting policy tends to be overly pessimistic. Some-
thing similar happens with the approaches in Section 3.2 based on the variance of
the return. In addition, the transformation of the optimization criterion produces a
distortion in the action values and the true long term utility of the actions are lost.
1467

===== PAGE 32 =====

Garc´ıa and Fern´andez
Finally, most of these approaches repeatedly visit risk situations until the optimiza-
tion criterion is correctly approximated and, subsequently, avoid dangerous situations.
As an example of the latter, the optimization criterion used by Geibel and Wysotzki
(2005) helps to reduce the number of visits to error states once the risk function is
approximated (Geibel and Wysotzki, 2005; Garc´ ıa and Fern´ andez, 2012). It could be
interesting to avoid future risk situations since it can provide a margin of reaction
before reaching a point where it is unavoidable to reach an error state.
• Detection of immediate risk. We are interested in detecting and reacting to immediate
risk situations from the early steps of the learning process while the classic optimiza-
tion criterion remains. This second one is related to the approaches in Section 4. The
worst thing that can happen to an agent in an environment may have a high return
in the long term, but fatal consequences in the short term. The Safe RL algorithm
should incorporate a mechanism to detect and react to immediate risk by manifest-
ing diﬀerent risk attitudes, while leaving the optimization criterion untouched. The
ability to assess the amount of immediate risk in any action allows one to make step-
by-step tradeoﬀs between attaining and abandoning the goal (i.e., the maximization
of the return) in order to ensure the safety of the agent, the learning system and
any external entity. The teacher advice approaches presented in Section 4.1.3.1 and
Section 4.1.3.2 are good examples of this property. In these approaches, when a risk
situation is detected by the agent or the teacher, the teacher provides safe informa-
tion to the agent to prevent fatal situations. The main drawback of most of these
approaches is that the risk is detected on the basis of the current state (Clouse, 1997;
Geramifard, 2012; Garc´ ıa and Fern´ andez, 2012), and it may be too late to react.
• Long term optimization of risk and immediate risk. We are interested in maximiz-
ing a long term measurement which considers some form of risk and, at the same
time, detects and reacts to immediate risk situations from the early steps of the learn-
ing process. The two previous approaches can be integrated into a same Safe RL
algorithm. As an example, Geibel’s approach (Geibel and Wysotzki, 2005) can be
combined with an approach based on the level of knowledge of the current state from
Section 4.1.3.1. The learner agent can ask for help in little known (Torrey and Taylor,
2012) or unknown states (Hailu and Sommer, 1998; Garc´ ıa and Fern´ andez, 2012) mit-
igating the eﬀects of risk situations from early steps of the learning process. At the
same time, the exploration directed by Geibel’s optimization criterion, which include
the risk function, ρπ(s), ensures the selection of safe actions preventing long-term risk
situations once the risk function is correctly approximated. The development of these
Safe RL algorithms is an area open for future research.
• Detection of long term risk. We are interested in detecting long-term risk situations
when the risk function is correctly approximated, but not in detect and react to
immediate risk situations from the early steps in the learning process. In addition, the
classic optimization criterion remains. This is related to the approaches in Section 4.2.
In this case, a risk metric is used to guide the exploration of the state and action
spaces in a risk-directed exploration process based on the controllability (Gehring and
Precup, 2013) or on the entropy (Law, 2005). In these approaches, the value function
1468

===== PAGE 33 =====

A Comprehensive Survey on Safe Reinforcement Learning
is learned separately, so optimal values and policies can be recovered if desired at a
later time. As regards the latter, it would be interesting to decouple Geibel’s risk
function based on error states, ρπ(s), from the value function. In this way, it would
be possible to analyze the eﬀect of considering risk as part of the objective function
with respect to considering risk only for risk-directed exploration while the objective
function remains.
• Detection of immediate and long term risk. In this case, we are interested in detecting
long-term risk situations when the risk function is correctly approximated, and in
detect and react to immediate risk situations from the early steps in the learning
process. The combination of immediate and long term risk detection mechanisms is
still an open issue in Safe RL. As an example, the approaches in Section 4.1.3.1 could
be combined with the approaches in Section 4.2. The learner agent can ask for help
in little known (Torrey and Taylor, 2012) or unknown states (Hailu and Sommer,
1998; Garc´ ıa and Fern´ andez, 2012), and when the risk metric is greater than a certain
threshold (e.g., C(st, at) ≥ w or ρπ(s) ≥ w). The ﬁrst helps to mitigate the eﬀects
of immediate risk, the second immediate risk situations to be prevented in the long
term through the delegation of the action taking to an external teacher instead of the
ongoing exploratory process. At the same time, the risk-directed exploration mitigates
the selection of actions which bring the risk situations closer.
5.2.3 Selection of the Mechanism for Risk Detection
The mechanism for risk detection should be automatic and not based on the intuition of a
human teacher. In most of the approaches in Section 4.1.3.2, the teacher decides when to
provide information to the learner agent based on its own feelings, but there is no metric as
to the best time to do it. It is important to be aware of the fact that this way of providing
the information is highly non-deterministic, i.e., the same human teacher can give the agent
information in certain situations but remain impassive in other scenarios that are very
similar. Moreover, the teacher observer can change his/her mind as to what is risky or not
while the agent is still learning.
5.2.4 Selection of the Learning Schema
Although policy search methods have been demonstrated to be good techniques for avoiding
risky situations, their safe exploration was related to the incorporation of teachers in the
initial population (Mart´ ın H. and Lope, 2009; Koppejan and Whiteson, 2011). The problem
of extracting knowledge (e.g., on the known space) from the networks or their weights makes
it almost impossible to incorporate mechanisms for safe exploration during the learning
process. As regards model-free vs. model-based approaches, there is still an open debate
within the RL community as to whether model-based or model-free could be shown to be
clearly superior to the other. This debate can also be taken in Safe RL.Model-based methods
have relative higher space and computational complexities and lower sample complexity
than model-free methods (Strehl et al., 2006). In general, this prevents the use of model-
based methods in large space and stochastic problems in which the approximation of an
accurate model from which derive a good policy is not possible. However, recentmodel-based
approaches have demonstrated successful handling with continuous state domains (Nouri,
1469

===== PAGE 34 =====

Garc´ıa and Fern´andez
2011; Hester and Stone, 2013). Having such a model is a useful entity for Safe RL: it allows
the agent to predict the consequences of actions before they are taken, allowing the agent
to generate virtual experience. Therefore, we consider that building models is an open issue
and a key ingredient of research and progress in Safe RL. So far, as shown in Table 2, most
of the Safe RL approaches are model-free.
5.2.5 Selection of the Exploration Strategy
The exploratory process is responsible for visits to undesirable states or risky situations
but also for progressively improve the policies learned. Techniques such as that proposed
in Section 4.1.2 do not require exploration, but only the exploitation of the learning model
derived from the teacher demonstrations. However, without additional exploration, the poli-
cies learned are heavily limited by the teacher demonstrations. The methods in Section 3.3
carry out safe exploration from among the policies in the constrained space. This may be
the more advisable intuitively, but many of these problems are computationally intractable,
which makes the formulation of RL algorithms diﬃcult for large space and stochastic tasks.
As regards the other strategies used, all of them lead to a risky behavior. In explo-
ration methods such as Rmax the algorithm still tends to end up generating (and using)
exploration policies in its initial stage. Additionally, Rmax follows the optimism in the face
of uncertainty principle, which consists of assuming a higher return on the most unknown
states. This optimism for reaching unknown states can produce an unsafe exploration,
since other authors establish a direct relationship between unknown and dangerous situa-
tions (Garc´ ıa and Fern´ andez, 2012). Exploration methods such asϵ − greedy, softmax, or
gaussian incorporates a random component which give rise to a certain chance of exploring
dangerous or undesirable states. The risk-directed exploration conducted by the use of risk
metrics requires the function to be correctly approximated beforehand to avoid risk situa-
tions. Therefore, we consider that if the exploration is carried out in the entire state and
action spaces (i.e., without constraints restricting the explorable/safe space), whatever the
exploration used, this should be carried out in combination with an automatic risk detection
mechanism (able to detect immediate and/or long term risk situations from the early steps
in the learning process) and abandoning the goal in order to ensure the safety of the agent
(e.g., asking for help from a teacher). Finally, if the goal is to obtain a safe policy at the
end, without worrying about the number of dangerous or undesirable situations that occur
during the learning process, then the exploratory strategy used to learn this policy is not
so relevant from a safety point of view.
6. Conclusions
In this paper we have presented a comprehensive survey on Safe Reinforcement Learning
techniques used to address control problems in which it is important to respect safety con-
straints. In this survey, we have contributed with a categorization of Safe RL techniques.
We ﬁrst segment the Safe RL techniques into two fundamental trends: the approaches based
on the modiﬁcation of the optimization criterion, and those based on the modiﬁcation of
the exploration process. We use this structure to survey the existing literature highlighting
the major advantages and drawbacks of the techniques presented. We present techniques
created speciﬁcally to address domains with a diverse nature of risk (e.g., those based on
1470

===== PAGE 35 =====

A Comprehensive Survey on Safe Reinforcement Learning
the variance of the return (Sato et al., 2002), on error states (Geibel and Wysotzki, 2005),
or on the controllability concept (Gehring and Precup, 2013), and others that have not been
created for this purpose, but have shown that their application to these domains can be
eﬀective in reducing the number of undesirable situations. Most of these techniques are
described in Section 4.1 where external knowledge is used. As regards the latter, diﬀerent
forms of initialization have been shown to reduce the number of helicopter crashes success-
fully (Mart´ ın H. and Lope, 2009; Koppejan and Whiteson, 2011), or the number of times
the agent moves into an obstacle in a Grid-World domain (Song et al., 2012; Maire, 2005);
deriving a policy from a ﬁnite set of safe demonstrations provided by a teacher have also
been shown to be a safe way of learning policies in risky domains (Abbeel et al., 2010);
ﬁnally, the eﬀectiveness of using teacher advice to provide actions in situations identiﬁed
as dangerous has recently been demonstrated (Garc´ ıa and Fern´ andez, 2012; Geramifard,
2012).
The current proliferation of robots requires that the techniques used for learning tasks
are safe. It has been shown that parameters learned in simulation often do not translate di-
rectly to reality, especially as heavy optimization on simulation has been observed to exploit
the inevitable simpliﬁcation of the simulator, thus creating a gap between simulation and
application that reduces the usefulness of learning in simulation. In addition, autonomous
robotic controllers must deal with a large number of factors such as the mechanical system
and electrical characteristics of the robot, as well as the environmental complexity. There-
fore, it is important to develop learning algorithms directly applicable to robots such as
Safe RL algorithms since it could reduce the amount of damage incurred and, consequently,
allow the lifespan of the robots to be extended.
Although Safe RL has proven to be a successful tool for learning policies which con-
sider some form of risk, there are still many areas open for research, several of which we
have identiﬁed in Section 5. As an example, the techniques based on the use of a risk func-
tion (Geibel and Wysotzki, 2005; Law, 2005; Gehring and Precup, 2013) have demonstrated
their eﬀectiveness in preventing risky situations once the risk function is correctly approxi-
mated. However, it would be desirable to prevent the risk situations from the early steps in
the learning process. In this way, teacher advice techniques can be used to incorporate prior
knowledge, thus mitigating the eﬀects of immediate risk situations until the risk function
is correctly approximated.
Acknowledgments
This paper has been partially supported by the Spanish Ministerio de Econom´ ıa y Compet-
itividad TIN2012-TIN2012-38079 and FEDER funds, and by the Innterconecta Programme
2011 project ITC-20111030 ADAPTA.
References
Pieter Abbeel. Apprenticeship Learning and Reinforcement Learning with Application to
Robotic Control. PhD thesis, Stanford, CA, USA, 2008. AAI3332983.
Pieter Abbeel and Andrew Y. Ng. Exploration and apprenticeship learning in reinforcement
learning. In Proceedings of the 22nd International Conference on Machine Learning, 2005.
1471

===== PAGE 36 =====

Garc´ıa and Fern´andez
Pieter Abbeel, Adam Coates, Timothy Hunter, and Andrew Y. Ng. Autonomous autoro-
tation of an rc helicopter. In Experimental Robotics, volume 54 of Springer Tracts in
Advanced Robotics, pages 385–394. Springer Berlin Heidelberg, 2009.
Pieter Abbeel, Adam Coates, and Andrew Y. Ng. Autonomous helicopter aerobatics
through apprenticeship learning. International Journal of Robotic Research, 29(13):1608–
1639, 2010.
Naoki Abe, Prem Melville, Cezar Pendus, Chandan K. Reddy, David L. Jensen, Vince P.
Thomas, James J. Bennett, Gary F. Anderson, Brent R. Cooley, Melissa Kowalczyk,
Mark Domick, and Timothy Gardinier. Optimizing debt collections using constrained
reinforcement learning. In Proceedings of the 16th international conference on Knowledge
discovery and data mining , pages 75–84, New York, NY, USA, 2010. ACM. ISBN 978-1-
4503-0055-1.
Eitan Altman. Asymptotic properties of constrained markov decision processes. Rapport
de recherche RR-1598, INRIA, 1992.
Brenna Argall, Sonia Chernova, Manuela Veloso, and Brett Browning. A survey of robot
learning from demonstration. Robotics and Autonomous Systems , 57(5):469–483, May
2009. ISSN 09218890.
Drew Bagnell. Learning Decisions: Robustness, Uncertainty, and Approximation . PhD
thesis, Robotics Institute, Carnegie Mellon University, Pittsburgh, PA, August 2004.
Drew Bagnell and Jeﬀ Schneider. Robustness and exploration in policy-search based re-
inforcement learning. In Proceedings of the 25th International Conference on Machine
Learning, pages 544–551, New York, NY, USA, 2008. ACM. ISBN 978-1-60558-205-4.
Drew Bagnell, Andrew Ng, and Jeﬀ Schneider. Solving uncertain markov decision problems.
Technical report, Robotics Institute Carnegie Mellon, 2001.
A. Baranes and P. Y. Oudeyer. R-IAC: Robust intrinsically motivated exploration and
active learning. Autonomous Mental Development, IEEE Transactions on , 1(3):155–169,
October 2009. ISSN 1943-0604.
Arnab Basu, Tirthankar Bhattacharyya, and Vivek S. Borkar. A learning algorithm for
risk-sensitive cost. Mathematics of Operational Research, 33(4):880–898, 2008.
Vivek S. Borkar. A sensitivity formula for risk-sensitive cost and the actor-critic algorithm.
Systems & Control Letters , 44:339–346, 2001.
Vivek S. Borkar. Q-learning for risk-sensitive control. Mathematics of Operations Research,
27(2):294–311, May 2002. ISSN 0364-765X.
Ronen I. Brafman and Moshe Tennenholtz. R-max - a general polynomial time algorithm for
near-optimal reinforcement learning. Journal of Machine Learning Research , 3:213–231,
March 2003. ISSN 1532-4435.
1472

===== PAGE 37 =====

A Comprehensive Survey on Safe Reinforcement Learning
Andriy Burkov and Brahim Chaib-draa. Reducing the complexity of multiagent reinforce-
ment learning. In Proceedings of the International Conference on Autonomous Agents
and Multi-Agent Systems , page 44, 2007.
Pedro Campos and Thibault Langlois. Abalearn: Eﬃcient self-play learning of the game
abalone. In INESC-ID, Neural Networks and Signal Processing Group , 2003.
Dotan Di Castro, Aviv Tamar, and Shie Mannor. Policy gradients with variance related
risk criteria. In Proceedings of the 29th International Conference on Machine Learning,
Edinburgh, Scotland, UK, 2012.
Victor Uc Cetina. Autonomous agent learning using an actor-critic algorithm and behavior
models. In Proceedings of the 7th International Conference on Autonomous Agents and
Multi-Agent Systems, Estoril, Portugal , pages 1353–1356, 2008.
Suman Chakravorty and David C. Hyland. Minimax reinforcement learning. In Proceedings
of the AIAA Guidance, Navigation, and Control Conference and Exhibit , Austin, Texas,
USA, 2003.
Yin Chang-Ming, Han-Xing Wang, and Fei Zhao. Risk-sensitive reinforcement learning
algorithms with generalized average criterion. Applied Mathematics and Mechanics , 28
(3):405–416, March 2007. ISSN 0253-4827.
Sonia Chernova and Manuela M. Veloso. Interactive policy learning through conﬁdence-
based autonomy. Journal of Artiﬁcial Intelligence Research , 34:1–25, 2009.
Kun-Jen Chung and Matthew J. Sobel. Discounted mdps: distribution functions and ex-
ponential utility maximization. SIAM Journal on Control Optimization , 25(1):49–62,
January 1987. ISSN 0363-0129.
Jeﬀery A. Clouse. On integrating apprentice learning and reinforcement learning. Technical
report, Amherst, MA, USA, 1997.
Jeﬀery A. Clouse and Paul E. Utgoﬀ. A teaching method for reinforcement learning. In
ML, pages 92–110. Morgan Kaufmann, 1992. ISBN 1-55860-247-X.
Stefano P. Coraluppi. Optimal control of markov decision processes for performance and
robustness. University of Maryland, College Park, Md., 1997.
Stefano P. Coraluppi and Steven I. Marcus. Risk-sensitive and minimax control of discrete-
time, ﬁnite-state markov decision processes. Automatica, 35:301–309, 1999.
Stefano P. Coraluppi and Steven I. Marcus. Mixed risk-neutral/minimax control of markov
decision processes. IEEE Transactions on Automatic Control , 45(3):528–532, 2000.
Erick Delage and Shie Mannor. Percentile optimization for markov decision processes with
parameter uncertainty. Operations Research, 58(1):203–213, January 2010.
Kurt Driessens and Saˇ so Dˇ zeroski. Integrating guidance into relational reinforcement learn-
ing. Machine Learning, 57(3):271–304, December 2004. ISSN 0885-6125.
1473

===== PAGE 38 =====

Garc´ıa and Fern´andez
Fernando Fern´ andez and Manuela Veloso. Probabilistic policy reuse in a reinforcement
learning agent. In Proceedings of the 5th International Joint Conference on Autonomous
Agents and Multi-Agent Systems , Hakodate, Japan, May 2006.
Fernando Fern´ andez, Javier Garc´ ıa, and Manuela M. Veloso. Probabilistic policy reuse for
inter-task transfer learning. Robotics and Autonomous Systems , 58(7):866–871, 2010.
Javier Garc´ ıa and Fernando Fern´ andez. Safe reinforcement learning in high-risk tasks
through policy improvement. In Proceedings of the IEEE Symposium on Adaptive Dy-
namic Programming And Reinforcement Learning, pages 76–83. IEEE, 2011.
Javier Garc´ ıa and Fernando Fern´ andez. Safe exploration of state and action spaces in
reinforcement learning. Journal of Artiﬁcial Intelligence Research, 45:515–564, December
2012.
Javier Garc´ ıa, Daniel Acera, and Fernando Fern´ andez. Safe reinforcement learning through
probabilistic policy reuse. In Proceedings of the 1st Multidisciplinary Conference on Re-
inforcement Learning and Decision Making , October 2013.
Chris Gaskett. Reinforcement learning under circumstances beyond its control. In Proceed-
ings of the International Conference on Computational Intelligence for Modelling Control
and Automation, 2003.
Clement Gehring and Doina Precup. Smart exploration in reinforcement learning using
absolute temporal diﬀerence errors. In Proceedings of the International Conference on
Autonomous Agents and Multi-Agent Systems, Saint Paul, MN, USA , pages 1037–1044,
2013.
Peter Geibel. Reinforcement learning for mdps with constraints. In Proceedings of the 17th
European Conference on Machine Learning, Berlin, Germany, , volume 4212 of Lecture
Notes in Computer Science , pages 646–653. Springer, 2006. ISBN 3-540-45375-X.
Peter Geibel and Fritz Wysotzki. Risk-sensitive reinforcement learning applied to control
under constraints. Journal of Artiﬁcial Intelligence Research , 24:81–108, 2005.
Alborz Geramifard. Practical Reinforcement Learning using Representation Learning and
Safe Exploration for Large Scale Markov Decision Processes . PhD thesis, Massachusetts
Institute of Technology, Department of Aeronautics and Astronautics, February 2012.
Alborz Geramifard, Joshua Redding, Nicholas Roy, and Jonathan P. How. UAV cooperative
control with stochastic risk models. In Proceedings of the American Control Conference,
pages 3393 – 3398, June 2011.
Alborz Geramifard, Joshua Redding, and JonathanP. How. Intelligent cooperative control
architecture: A framework for performance improvement using safe learning. Journal of
Intelligent & Robotic Systems , 72(1):83–103, 2013. ISSN 0921-0296.
Abhijit Gosavi. Reinforcement learning for model building and variance-penalized control.
In Proceedings of the Winter Simulation Conference , pages 373–379. WSC, 2009.
1474

===== PAGE 39 =====

A Comprehensive Survey on Safe Reinforcement Learning
Getachew Hailu and Gerald Sommer. Learning by biasing. In Proceedings of the Inter-
national Conference on Robotics and Automation , pages 2168–2173. IEEE Computer
Society, 1998. ISBN 0-7803-4301-8.
Alexander Hans, Daniel Schneegass, Anton M. Sch¨ afer, and Steﬀen Udluft. Safe Exploration
for Reinforcement Learning. In Proceedings of the European Symposium on Artiﬁcial
Neural Network, pages 143–148, 2008.
Matthias Heger. Risk and reinforcement learning: concepts and dynamic programming .
ZKW-Bericht. ZKW, 1994a.
Matthias Heger. Consideration of risk in reinforcement learning. In Proceedings of the 11th
International Conference on Machine Learning , pages 105–111, 1994b.
Alfredo Garc´ ıa Hern´ andez-D´ ıaz, Carlos A. Coello Coello, Fatima Perez, Rafael Caballero,
Juli´ an Molina Luque, and Luis V. Santana-Quintero. Seeding the initial population of a
multi-objective evolutionary algorithm using gradient-based information. In Proceedings
of the IEEE Congress on Evolutionary Computation, Hong Kong, China , pages 1617–
1624, 2008.
Todd Hester and Peter Stone. TEXPLORE: Real-time sample-eﬃcient reinforcement learn-
ing for robots. Machine Learning, 90(3), 2013.
Ronald A. Howard and James E. Matheson. Risk-sensitive markov decision processes.
Management Science, 18(7):356–369, 1972.
Marcus Hutter. Self-optimizing and pareto-optimal policies in general environments based
on bayes-mixtures. In Proceedings of the 15th Annual Conference on Computational
Learning Theory, Sydney, Australia, 2002.
Roberto Iglesias, Carlos V. Regueiro, J. Correa, E. Sanchez, and Senen Barro. Improving
wall following behaviour in a mobile robot using reinforcement learning. In Proceedings
of the International symposium on engineering of intelligent systems , Tenerife (Espa˜ na),
February 1998a. ISBN 3-906454-12-6.
Roberto Iglesias, Carlos V. Regueiro, J.Correa, and Senen Barro. Supervised reinforcement
learning: Application to a wall following behaviour in a mobile robot. In Methodology
and tools in knowledge-based systems , pages 300–309, Castellon (Espa˜ na), June 1998b.
Lecture notes in artiﬁcial intelligence 1415. ISBN 3-540-64574-8.
Garud N. Iyengar. Robust dynamic programming. Mathematics of Operations Research ,
30:257–280, 2004.
Koen Hermans Jessica Vleugel, Michelle Hoogwout and Imre Gelens. Reinforcement learn-
ing with avoidance of unsafe regions. BSc Project, 2011.
Guofei Jiang, Cang-Pu Wu, and George Cybenko. Minimax-based reinforcement learning
with state aggregation. In Proceedings of the 37th IEEE Conference on Decision &
Control, Tampa, Florida, USA, 1998.
1475

===== PAGE 40 =====

Garc´ıa and Fern´andez
Kshitij Judah, Saikat Roy, Alan Fern, and Thomas G. Dietterich. Reinforcement learning
via practice and critique advice. In Proceedings of the 24th AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial
Intelligence, Atlanta, Georgia, USA , 2010.
Yoshinobu Kadota, Masami Kurano, and Masami Yasuda. Discounted markov decision
processes with utility constraints. Computers & Mathematics with Applications , 51(2):
279–284, 2006.
Hisashi Kashima. Risk-sensitive learning via minimization of empirical conditional value-
at-risk. IEICE Transactions, 90-D(12):2043–2052, 2007.
Michael Kearns and Satinder Singh. Near-optimal reinforcement learning in polynomial
time. Machine Learning, 49(2-3):209–232, 2002. ISSN 0885-6125.
W. Bradley Knox and Peter Stone. Interactively shaping agents via human reinforcement:
the tamer framework. In Proceedings of the 5th International Conference on Knowledge
Capture, September 2009.
W. Bradley Knox and Peter Stone. Combining manual feedback with subsequent mdp
reward signals for reinforcement learning. In Proceedings of 9th International Conference
on Autonomous Agents and Multiagent Systems , May 2010.
W. Bradley Knox, Matthew E. Taylor, and Peter Stone. Understanding human teaching
modalities in reinforcement learning environments: A preliminary report. In Proceedings
of the Agents Learning Interactively from Human Teachers Workshop , July 2011.
Rogier Koppejan and Shimon Whiteson. Neuroevolutionary reinforcement learning for gen-
eralized helicopter control. In Proceedings of the Genetic and Evolutionary Computation
Conference, pages 145–152, July 2009.
Rogier Koppejan and Shimon Whiteson. Neuroevolutionary reinforcement learning for gen-
eralized control of simulated helicopters. Evolutionary Intelligence, 4:219–241, 2011.
Gregory Kuhlmann, Peter Stone, Raymond J. Mooney, and Jude W. Shavlik. Guiding a
reinforcement learner with natural language advice: Initial results in robocup soccer. In
Proceedings of the AAAI-2004 Workshop on Supervisory Control of Learning and Adap-
tive Systems, July 2004.
Edith L.M. Law. Risk-directed exploration in reinforcement learning . McGill University,
2005.
Long Ji Lin. Programming robots using reinforcement learning and teaching. In Proceedings
of the 9th National Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence, Anaheim, CA, USA, July 14-19,
1991, Volume 2, pages 781–786, 1991.
Long-Ji Lin. Self-improving reactive agents based on reinforcement learning, planning and
teaching. Machine Learning, 8(3–4):293–321, 1992.
Yaxin Liu, Richard Goodwin, and Sven Koenig. Risk-averse auction agents. In Proceedings
of the International Conference on Autonomous Agents and Multi-Agent Systems , pages
353–360. ACM, 2003. ISBN 1-58113-683-8.
1476

===== PAGE 41 =====

A Comprehensive Survey on Safe Reinforcement Learning
David G. Luenberger. Investment science. Oxford University Press, Incorporated, 2013.
Richard Maclin and Jude W. Shavlik. Creating advice-taking reinforcement learners. Ma-
chine Learning, 22(1-3):251–281, 1996. doi: 10.1023/A:1018020625251.
Richard Maclin, Jude Shavlik, Lisa Torrey, Trevor Walker, and Edward Wild. Giving advice
about preferred actions to reinforcement learners via knowledge-based kernel regression.
In Proceedings of the 20th National Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence , 2005a.
Richard Maclin, Jude Shavlik, Trevor Walker, and Lisa Torrey. Knowledge-based support-
vector regression for reinforcement learning. In Proceedings of the IJCAI’05 Workshop
on Reasoning, Representation, and Learning in Computer Games , 2005b.
Frederic Maire. Apprenticeship learning for initial value functions in reinforcement learning.
In Proceedings of the IJCAI’05 Workshop on Planning and Learning in A Priori Unknown
or Dynamic Domains , pages 23–28, 2005.
Shie Mannor and John N. Tsitsiklis. Mean-variance optimization in markov decision pro-
cesses. In Proceedings of the 28th International Conference on Machine Learning, Belle-
vue, Washington, USA , pages 177–184, 2011.
Harry Markowitz. Portfolio selection. In Journal of Finance , volume 7, pages 77–91, 1952.
Jos´ e Antonio Mart´ ın H. and Javier Lope. Learning autonomous helicopter ﬂight with
evolutionary reinforcement learning. In Proceedings of the 12th International Conference
on Computer Aided Systems Theory , pages 75–82, 2009. ISBN 978-3-642-04771-8.
Helmut Mausser and Dan Rosen. Beyond var: From measuring risk to managing risk.
ALGO Research Quarterly, 1(2):5–20, 1998.
John Mccarthy. Programs with common sense. In Semantic Information Processing, pages
403–418. MIT Press, 1959.
Oliver Mihatsch and Ralph Neuneier. Risk-sensitive reinforcement learning.Machine Learn-
ing, 49(2-3):267–290, 2002. ISSN 0885-6125.
Teodor Mihai Moldovan and Pieter Abbeel. Safe exploration in markov decision processes.
In Proceedings of NIPS Workshop on Bayesian Optimization, Experimental Design and
Bandits, 2011.
Teodor Mihai Moldovan and Pieter Abbeel. Safe exploration in markov decision processes.
In Proceedings of the 29th International Conference on Machine Learning, Edinburgh,
Scotland, UK, 2012a.
Teodor Mihai Moldovan and Pieter Abbeel. Risk aversion in markov decision processes via
near optimal chernoﬀ bounds. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems 25,
Lake Tahoe, Nevada, United States. , pages 3140–3148, 2012b.
David L. Moreno, Carlos V. Regueiro, Roberto Iglesias, and Senen Barro. Using prior knowl-
edge to improve reinforcement learning in mobile robotics. In Proceedings fo the Confer-
ence Towards Autonomous Robotics Systems, Bath (Reino Unido), September 2004.
1477

===== PAGE 42 =====

Garc´ıa and Fern´andez
Tetsuro Morimura, Masashi Sugiyama, Hisashi Kashima, Hirotaka Hachiya, and Toshiyuki
Tanaka. Nonparametric return distribution approximation for reinforcement learning. In
Proceedings of the 27th International Conference on Machine Learning , pages 799–806,
2010a.
Tetsuro Morimura, Masashi Sugiyama, Hisashi Kashima, Hirotaka Hachiya, and Toshiyuki
Tanaka. Parametric return density estimation for reinforcement learning. In Proceedings
of the 26th Conference on Uncertainty in Artiﬁcial Intelligence , pages 368–375, Catalina
Island, California, USA, Jul. 8–11 2010b.
Arnab Nilim and Laurent El Ghaoui. Robust control of markov decision processes with
uncertain transition matrices. Operational Research, 53(5):780–798, September 2005.
ISSN 0030-364X.
Ali Nouri. Eﬃcient Model-Based Exploration in Continuous State-Space Environments .
PhD thesis, New Brunswick, NJ, USA, 2011. AAI3444957.
Ali Nouri and Michael L. Littman. Multi-resolution exploration in continuous spaces. In
Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems 21 , pages 1209–1216, 2008.
Takayuki Osogami. Robustness and risk-sensitivity in markov decision processes. In Ad-
vances in Neural Information Processing Systems 25, Lake Tahoe, Nevada, United States,
pages 233–241, 2012.
Stephen D. Patek. On terminating markov decision processes with a risk-averse objective
function. Automatica, 37(9):1379–1386, 2001.
Frederick Philip Klahr Hayes-Roth and David J. Mostow. Advice-taking and knowledge
reﬁnement: An iterative view of skill acquisition. Cognitive Skills and Their Acquisition ,
1981.
Sameera S. Ponda, Luke B. Johnson, and Jonathan P. How. Risk allocation strategies for
distributed chance-constrained task allocation. In American Control Conference, June
2013.
Martin L. Putterman. Markov decision processes: Discrete stochastic dynamic program-
ming. Jhon Wiley & Sons, Inc, 1994.
Michael T. Rosenstein and Andrew G. Barto. Supervised learning combined with an actor-
critic architecture. Technical report, Amherst, MA, USA, 2002.
Michael T. Rosenstein and Andrew G. Barto.Supervised actor-critic reinforcement learning.
Wiley-IEEE Press, 2004.
Daniil Ryabko and Marcus Hutter. Theorical Computer Science, (3):274–284.
Makoto Sato, Hajime Kimura, and Shigenobu Kobayashi. TD algorithm for the variance of
return and mean-variance reinforcement learning. Transactions of the Japanese Society
for Artiﬁcial Intelligence , 16:353–362, 2002.
1478

===== PAGE 43 =====

A Comprehensive Survey on Safe Reinforcement Learning
Nils T. Siebel and Gerald Sommer. Evolutionary reinforcement learning of artiﬁcial neural
networks. International Journal of Hybrid Intelligent Systems , 4:171–183, August 2007.
ISSN 1448-5869.
William D. Smart and Leslie Pack Kaelbling. Practical reinforcement learning in continuous
spaces. In Artiﬁcial Intelligence, pages 903–910. Morgan Kaufmann, 2000.
Alice Smith, Alice E. Smith, David W. Coit, Thomas Baeck, David Fogel, and Zbigniew
Michalewicz. Penalty functions . Oxford University Press and Institute of Physics Pub-
lishing, 1997.
Yong Song, Yi bin Li, Cai hong Li, and Gui fang Zhang. An eﬃcient initialization ap-
proach of q-learning for mobile robots. International Journal of Control, Automation
and Systems, 10(1):166–172, 2012.
Alexander L. Strehl, Lihong Li, Eric Wiewiora, John Langford, and Michael L. Littman.
PAC model-free reinforcement learning. In Proceedings of the 23rd International Confer-
ence on Machine Learning, ICML ’06, pages 881–888, New York, NY, USA, 2006. ACM.
ISBN 1-59593-383-2.
Halit B. Suay and Sonia Chernova. Eﬀect of human guidance and state space size on
interactive reinforcement learning. In Proceedings of the IEEE International Symposium
on Robot and Human Interactive Communication , pages 1–6. IEEE, July 2011. ISBN
978-1-4577-1571-6.
Richard S. Sutton and Andrew G. Barto. Reinforcement learning: an introduction . The
MIT Press, March 1998. ISBN 0262193981.
Giorgio Szeg¨ o. Measures of risk. European Journal of Operational Research , 163(1):5–19,
2005.
Hamdy A. Taha. Operations research: an introduction . Number 1. Macmillan Publishing
Company, 1992. ISBN 9780024189752.
Aviv Tamar, Huan Xu, and Shie Mannor. Scaling Up Robust MDPs by Reinforcement
Learning. Computing Research Repository, abs/1306.6189, 2013.
Jie Tang, Arjun Singh, Nimbus Goehausen, and Pieter Abbeel. Parameterized maneuver
learning for autonomous helicopter ﬂight. In International Conference on Robotics and
Automation, 2010.
Matthew E. Taylor and Peter Stone. Representation transfer for reinforcement learning. In
Fall Symposium on Computational Approaches to Representation Change during Learning
and Development, November 2007.
Matthew E. Taylor and Peter Stone. Transfer learning for reinforcement learning domains:
A survey. Journal of Machine Learning Research , 10(1):1633–1685, 2009.
Matthew E. Taylor, Peter Stone, and Yaxin Liu. Transfer learning via inter-task mappings
for temporal diﬀerence learning. Journal of Machine Learning Research, 8(1):2125–2167,
2007.
1479

===== PAGE 44 =====

Garc´ıa and Fern´andez
Andrea L. Thomaz and Cynthia Breazeal. Reinforcement learning with human teachers:
Evidence of feedback and guidance with implications for learning performance. InProceed-
ings of the 21st National Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence, AAAI’06, pages 1000–1005.
AAAI Press, 2006. ISBN 978-1-57735-281-5.
Andrea Lockerd Thomaz and Cynthia Breazeal. Teachable robots: Understanding human
teaching behavior to build more eﬀective robot learners. Artiﬁcial Intelligence, 172(6-7):
716–737, 2008.
Lisa Torrey and Matthew E. Taylor. Help an agent out: Student/teacher learning in se-
quential decision tasks. In Proceedings of the AAMAS Workshop Adaptive and Learning
Agents, June 2012.
Lisa Torrey, Trevor Walker, Jude Shavlik, and Richard Maclin. Using advice to transfer
knowledge acquired in one reinforcement learning task to another. Machine Learning:
ECML 2005, pages 412–424, 2005.
Paul E. Utgoﬀ and Jeﬀrey A. Clouse. Two kinds of training information for evaluation
function learning. In Proceedings of the 9th National Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence,
Anaheim, CA, USA, July 14-19, 1991, Volume 2 , pages 596–600, 1991.
Pablo Quint´ ıa Vidal, Roberto Iglesias Rodr´ ıguez, Miguel Rodr´ ıguez Gonz´ alez, and Car-
los V´ azquez Regueiro. Learning on real robots from experience and simple user feedback.
Journal of Physical Agents , 7(1), 2013. ISSN 1888-0258.
Pradyot Korupolu VN and Balaraman Ravindran. Beyond rewards: Learning from richer
supervision. In Proceedings of the 9th European Workshop on Reinforcement Learning ,
Athens Greece, September 2011.
Thomas J. Walsh, Daniel Hewlett, and Clayton T. Morrison. Blending autonomous explo-
ration and apprenticeship learning. In Proceedings of the Conference Advances in Neural
Information Processing Systems 24, Granada, Spain , pages 2258–2266, 2011.
Christopher Watkins. Learning from Delayed Rewards. PhD thesis, King’s College, Cam-
bridge, UK, May 1989.
Kemin Zhou, John C. Doyle, and Keith Glover. Robust and Optimal Control. Prentice-Hall,
Inc., Upper Saddle River, NJ, USA, 1996. ISBN 0-13-456567-3.
1480