

===== PAGE 1 =====
 
Contents lists available at ScienceDirect
Engineering Applications of Artificial Intelligence
journal homepage: www.elsevier.com/locate/engappai  
Research paper
Deep reinforcement learning for periodic Unmanned Aerial Vehicle task 
allocation and path planning with a Fixed Nest Station in power inspection
Yuxuan Sun a,b, Feng Gao a,b, Yongjie Xue c, Bin Yu a,b
 ,∗
a Key Laboratory of Intelligent Transportation Technology and System, Ministry of Education, School of Transportation Science and Engineering, Beihang 
University, Beijing 100191, China
b School of Transportation Science and Engineering, Beihang University, Beijing 100191, China
c Department of Civil Engineering, University of Hong Kong, Hong Kong, China
A R T I C L E  I N F O
Keywords:
Deep reinforcement learning
Unmanned Aerial Vehicle
Periodic power inspection
Task allocation
Path planning
 A B S T R A C T
In power system inspections, the coupling of heterogeneous inspection frequencies and strict endurance 
constraints necessitates complex long-horizon periodic scheduling. While traditional optimization methods 
often overlook these specific periodic requirements, the Unmanned Aerial Vehicle (UAV) Fixed Nest Station 
mode offers a new operational paradigm to execute such autonomous tasks. We consider this operational 
scenario and propose a specialized dynamic-pruning and topology-aware deep reinforcement learning (DP-
TARL) framework. The DPTARL is developed to mitigate myopic optimization behavior and improve the 
robustness of long-horizon periodic scheduling. Specifically, we construct a dynamic state pruning (DSP) 
architecture conditioned on system states. This architecture enforces feasibility constraints during decision 
making. As a result, it removes invalid actions and accelerates convergence. Furthermore, we incorporate 
a topology-aware attention (TAA) module to capture sequential dependencies among heterogeneous targets, 
enabling efficient allocation of periodic tasks. To address the challenges of long-horizon planning during 
training, we design a composite reward mechanism. It balances immediate inspection gains with long-horizon 
periodic consistency. This design helps reduce decision tendencies of myopic optimization behavior. Extensive 
computational experiments demonstrate the effectiveness of DPTARL. In small-scale verification, it achieves 
near-optimal performance with an optimality gap below 10% and substantial inference acceleration over 
exact solvers. In large-scale evaluations against representative baselines, including ALNS, PPO, and DQN, 
DPTARL reduces myopic optimization tendencies, shortens the average flight path by 16.64%, and improves 
flight efficiency by 9.89%. These results indicate that DPTARL provides an effective and scalable solution for 
large-scale, periodic and long-horizon UAV inspection scheduling.
1. Introduction
Ensuring the reliability of power systems requires regular and effec-
tive inspection. In real-world power inspection operations, inspection 
targets mainly consist of substations, transmission towers, and distribu-
tion poles. Due to distinct operational characteristics and exposure to 
environmental stress, power infrastructure components require differ-
ent inspection frequencies (Mbuli et al., 2020; Cacace et al., 2021). For 
example, substations are typically inspected daily, transmission towers 
weekly, and distribution poles monthly. However, existing research of-
ten simplifies the reality of inspection by assuming uniform inspection 
requirements or by focusing on single trip path planning (Gazzea et al., 
2022). Such assumptions ignore the periodic nature of inspection tasks 
and limit the applicability of the resulting methods to long-horizon 
maintenance in large-scale power networks.
∗ Corresponding author.
E-mail address: yubinyb@buaa.edu.cn (B. Yu).
Compared with manual inspections, unmanned aerial vehicle (UAV) 
based inspection has been widely recognized as a safer and more cost-
effective solution for power infrastructure inspection (Liu et al., 2019; 
Tedeschi et al., 2020; Caballero et al., 2024). To enable autonomous 
and continuous inspection operations, the UAV Fixed Nest Station 
mode has recently emerged as a promising operational paradigm. By 
providing automated charging and storage capabilities, such infrastruc-
ture supports long-horizon planning of periodic missions with minimal 
human intervention. However, this operating mode poses a critical 
challenge due to tight coupling between UAV endurance limits and 
multi-frequency inspection demands. Unlike single trip optimization 
settings, decision making in this context exhibits strong temporal de-
pendencies. As a result, decisions made at one stage of the schedule 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.engappai.2026.115219
Received 8 January 2026; Received in revised form 26 April 2026; Accepted 21 May 2026
Engineering Applications of Artiϧcial Intelligence 179 (2026) 115219 
Available online 28 May 2026 
0952-1976/© 2026 Elsevier Ltd. All rights are reserved, including those for text and data mining, AI training, and similar technologies. 

===== PAGE 2 =====
Y. Sun et al.
Fig. 1. Illustration of UAV Fixed Nest Station power inspection scenario.
can directly affect task feasibility and inspection compliance at later 
stages.
Solving the Periodic Power Inspection Problem under the UAV Fixed 
Nest Station mode (PIPUFN) entails three fundamental mathematical 
and computational challenges. First, the combination of long-horizon 
planning and large-scale power networks results in a combinatorial 
explosion of the state-action space, which makes traditional optimiza-
tion methods difficult to scale. Second, inspection targets are spatially 
distributed and topologically heterogeneous, making it difficult for 
conventional solvers to capture the complex sequential dependencies 
among diverse nodes. Third, under strict endurance constraints, the 
scheduler may favor immediately reachable tasks and neglect future 
periodic requirements. In this paper, we describe this tendency as 
myopic optimization behavior. Such myopic optimization behavior 
ultimately leads to degradation of system stability and efficiency in the 
scheduling horizon. To evaluate whether such behavior is alleviated, 
we use flight efficiency (FE) as a practical indicator which detailed 
in Section 5. In this engineering environment, higher flight efficiency 
represents better task execution efficiency and indicates that myopic 
optimization behavior is suppressed. The application scenario is shown 
in Fig.  1.
To address the above challenges, we propose a dynamic-pruning and 
topology-aware deep reinforcement learning (DPTARL) framework for 
the joint optimization of periodic task allocation and path planning. 
The DPTARL incorporates operational feasibility constraints into the 
learning process and aims to produce effective scheduling policies over 
long planning horizons. It also balances immediate decision feasibility 
with long-term periodic requirements. The main contributions of this 
paper are summarized as follows:
(1) We propose a dynamic state pruning (DSP) mechanism to reduce 
the rapidly expanding decision space in large-scale periodic scheduling. 
By removing infeasible actions online according to endurance and 
periodic constraints, DSP incorporates physical feasibility directly into 
the decoding process. This reduces invalid exploration and improves 
both operational reliability and training efficiency.
(2) We introduce a topology-aware attention (TAA) module to 
capture the spatial and temporal dependencies among heterogeneous 
inspection targets. By embedding the structural information of the 
inspection network into the policy representation, TAA enables the 
agent to generate more effective global routing decisions and improves 
its adaptability to different grid topologies.
(3) We design a constraint-driven composite reward mechanism for 
long-horizon periodic scheduling and introduce flight efficiency (FE) 
as an indicator of UAV operational utilization. By balancing immediate 
routing benefits with long-term periodic and feasibility requirements, 
this design mitigates myopic optimization behavior and promotes more 
stable scheduling performance.
The structure of this paper is organized as follows. In Section 2, we 
review the research progress in related fields. In Section 3, we detail 
the problem description and mathematical model. In Section 4, we 
introduce the deep reinforcement learning framework DPTARL. Sec-
tion 5 presents the experimental results and analysis. Finally, Section 6 
concludes the paper.
2. Literature review
Task allocation and path planning have long been studied inde-
pendently in UAV research. On the task allocation side, prior work 
has explored auction-based methods (Bai et al., 2023), quantum ge-
netic algorithms (Liu et al., 2021), game-theoretic formulations (Wang 
et al., 2022), and intuitionistic fuzzy bilateral matching (Gao, 2025). 
On the path planning side, meta-heuristics such as particle swarm 
optimization (Na et al., 2023; Huang et al., 2023) and grey wolf 
optimization (Zhang et al., 2021), as well as DRL-based planners with 
improved reward shaping (Wang et al., 2025; Luo et al., 2024; Zhang 
et al., 2023), have been widely adopted. A few recent studies have 
attempted joint optimization via reinforcement learning combined with 
multi-agent coordination or integer programming (Li et al., 2024; 
Mirza et al., 2023; Zhao et al., 2024; Li et al., 2026). However, 
treating task allocation and path planning separately can lead to short-
sighted decisions and reduced efficiency. Even in existing integrated 
frameworks, large-scale periodic constraints remain difficult to handle 
effectively (Wu et al., 2025).
Deep reinforcement learning (DRL) and graph-structured represen-
tations have substantially advanced UAV scheduling by enabling poli-
cies that learn directly from problem topology. DRL-based trajectory 
planners combined with nonlinear model predictive control have im-
proved tracking precision under dynamic constraints (Shi et al., 2026), 
while Graph Convolutional Network (GCN)-based approaches have 
Engineering Applications of Artiϧcial Intelligence 179 (2026) 115219 
2 

===== PAGE 3 =====
Y. Sun et al.
been applied to multi-UAV task allocation, transforming binary assign-
ment into continuous optimization with strong generalization across 
large task sets (Zheng et al., 2023). Decentralized Graph Neural Net-
work (GNN) architectures further encode inter-agent communication 
constraints directly into the assignment policy, enabling scalable co-
ordination without centralized control (Goarin and Loianno, 2024). A 
double-level DRL framework (DL-DRL) additionally decomposes large-
scale UAV scheduling into hierarchical allocation and routing sub-
problems solved by dedicated encoder–decoder models (Mao et al., 
2025). Recent studies have also addressed the Periodic Vehicle Routing 
Problem (PVRP) using deep learning to embed temporal visit pat-
terns (Shahbazian et al., 2024). In related combinatorial optimization 
problems, Transformer-based architectures have also been increasingly 
adopted because of their strong ability to capture long-range dependen-
cies among nodes. Recent studies have also explored broader intelligent 
and decentralized paradigms for UAV systems. Large Language Models 
(LLMs) are being integrated into UAV networks to support zero-shot 
reasoning and more complex decision-making (Javaid et al., 2024). 
Meanwhile, federated learning has become an important approach for 
privacy-preserving and secure multi-UAV coordination without central-
ized servers (Cheng et al., 2025). These developments suggest that 
topology-aware encoders combined with DRL provide a promising 
foundation for large-scale inspection scheduling. However, both hierar-
chical and PVRP-based models usually operate under idealized settings 
with soft constraints, making them less effective for enforcing strict 
physical limits such as UAV endurance and daily sortie capacity.
Multi-Agent Reinforcement Learning (MARL) and Hierarchical Re-
inforcement Learning (HRL) represent the two most relevant paradigms 
for long-horizon UAV scheduling. On the MARL side, Betalo et al. 
(2025) proposed a dynamic charging and path planning framework 
for UAV-powered rechargeable wireless sensor networks using MARL, 
jointly optimizing charging schedules and trajectories. Similarly, Betalo 
et al. (2024) developed a MARL-based task scheduling and resource 
sharing scheme for Open Radio Access Network-empowered multi-
UAV systems, achieving improved throughput through coordinated 
heterogeneous-agent policies. On the HRL side, hierarchical frame-
works that separate high-level mission assignment from low-level mo-
tion execution have demonstrated improved training stability for UAV 
navigation (Liu et al., 2023) and energy-efficient computation offload-
ing (Zhou et al., 2023). However, high-level policies operate in abstract 
subgoal spaces and do not explicitly account for hard constraints. As a 
result, low-level policies may fail to execute the generated sub-goals 
within battery or deadline limits.
In summary, decoupled optimization, MARL, and HRL all exhibit 
myopic optimization behavior when applied to long-horizon periodic 
inspection problems. Decoupled methods treat task allocation and route 
planning separately and therefore fail to capture the coupling between 
these decisions. MARL methods are often affected by non-stationarity 
and usually do not enforce periodic feasibility at the individual-agent 
level. HRL methods rely on abstract sub-goals, but these sub-goals may 
violate hard endurance constraints during execution. As a result, all 
three types of methods struggle to maintain reliable performance for 
heterogeneous periodic inspection tasks over long horizons. Another 
limitation is that existing methods rarely incorporate network topol-
ogy and dynamic feasibility directly into the learning process, which 
weakens exploration efficiency and limits scalability. To address these 
issues, we propose the DPTARL framework, which integrates a Dynamic 
State Pruning mechanism (DSP) with a Topology-Aware Assignment 
module (TAA). The DSP removes infeasible actions at each decision 
step, while the TAA embeds the inspection network graph into the 
policy representation. Together, these two modules improve decision 
quality and maintain periodic feasibility over the entire scheduling 
horizon within a unified framework.
3. Problem description and model formulation
This section introduces PIPUFN in detail. In Section 3.1, we describe 
the UAV operating mode, inspection tasks, and the key definitions. 
Then we formulate the mathematical model in Section 3.2.
3.1. Problem description
In this paper, we model the inspection system under the UAV Fixed 
Nest Station mode as a directed graph network 𝐺 = (𝑉 , 𝐸), where 
𝑉  represents the set of nodes and 𝐸 represents the set of arcs. The 
node set 𝑉  is decomposed into four topologically distinct subsets: 
the Fixed Nest Station node 𝑣0, substation nodes 𝑣𝑆 , transmission 
tower nodes 𝑣𝑇 , and distribution pole nodes 𝑣𝐷. Each element 𝑒𝜛
in the arc set 𝐸 represents a bidirectional connection, characterized 
by attributes including flight speed 𝑣𝑓 𝑙𝑦, distance 𝑑𝑖𝑗 , and flight time 
𝑡𝑖𝑗 . A critical feature of this system is the heterogeneity of inspection 
periodicity. Specifically, substations require daily inspections(𝜌𝑣𝑆 =
28), transmission towers weekly inspections(𝜌𝑣𝑇 = 4 ), and distribution 
poles monthly inspections(𝜌𝑣𝐷 = 1 ). Consequently, the problem is 
defined over a planning horizon 𝑇 corresponding to the maximum 
period. Under the UAV Fixed Nest Station mode, the maximum UAV 
battery endurance is defined as 𝐵max. Energy consumption calcula-
tions throughout this paper are based on the sum of flight time and 
inspection time (total inspection time). The time required for UAV 
inspection varies by the type of tasks. For substations is 𝑇
(
𝜏𝑣𝑆
)
, for 
transmission towers is 𝑇
(
𝜏𝑣𝑇
)
, and for distribution poles is 𝑇
(
𝜏𝑣𝐷
)
. 
The UAV can perform multiple inspection tasks in one day. Thus, 
we define the maximum daily inspection number as 𝜂max. The daily 
inspection counts are denoted as 𝜂 = { 𝜂1, … , 𝜂28
}  and the path set on 
the 𝑡th day is represented as 𝑃𝑡 =
{
𝑝𝑎𝑡ℎ1, … , 𝑝𝑎𝑡ℎ𝜂𝑡
}
. To illustrate the 
spatiotemporal coupling inherent in the proposed model, Fig.  2 presents 
a representative scenario consisting of one UAV Fixed Nest Station 𝑉𝑁 , 
two substations { 𝑉𝑆1, 𝑉𝑆2
} , three distribution poles { 𝑉𝐷1, 𝑉𝐷2, 𝑉𝐷3
} , 
and four transmission towers { 𝑉𝑇 1, 𝑉𝑇 2, 𝑉𝑇 3, 𝑉𝑇 4
} . The task allocation 
results and path trajectories are shown for the period days of 1, 2, and 
28. For each day of task execution, the remaining inspection counts 
for each pole are denoted as { 𝑟𝑡
𝑆1, 𝑟𝑡
𝑆2, 𝑟𝑡
𝐷1, 𝑟𝑡
𝐷2, 𝑟𝑡
𝐷3, 𝑟𝑡
𝑇 1, 𝑟𝑡
𝑇 2, 𝑟𝑡
𝑇 3, 𝑟𝑡
𝑇 4
} . 
The trajectory { 𝑅1, 𝑅2, 𝑅3
}  in the figure represents three inspection 
trajectories of the UAV for the day. This scenario represents only one 
feasible solution. While substations must be inspected on a daily basis, 
the inspection of transmission towers and distribution poles can be 
scheduled within flexible time windows, which gives rise to a large 
combinatorial space for task allocation.
To strictly formulate the problem within a tractable mathemati-
cal framework, we establish the following fundamental operational 
assumptions:
Definition 1.  In modern power inspection systems, the UAV must 
return to the UAV Fixed Nest Station for recharging or battery swapping 
upon completing a sortie. State-of-the-art fast-charging technologies 
or automated swapping mechanisms can fully replenish the battery 
within an interval of approximately 60 min. In our periodic scheduling 
formulation, the primary operational bottleneck is the maximum daily 
sortie capacity (i.e., 𝜂max = 7), rather than the absolute continuous time. 
Even under the maximum workload of 7 sorties, the cumulative flight, 
inspection, and ground-replenishment time strictly remains well within 
the 24-hour daily operational window. Consequently, the ground charg-
ing duration is naturally absorbed into the inter-sortie intervals and 
does not constrain the macro-level sequential routing. Therefore, it is 
mathematically decoupled from the objective optimization process.
Definition 2.  The UAV battery discharge profile is assumed to be 
linear. Consequently, all energy consumption in this paper is quantified 
and calculated based on time metrics, scaled by a constant power rate 
𝜌.
Justification: While micro-level UAV energy consumption is sub-
ject to complex, non-linear aerodynamic factors (e.g., wind resis-
tance, acceleration), adopting a linear discharge assumption is a widely 
Engineering Applications of Artiϧcial Intelligence 179 (2026) 115219 
3 

===== PAGE 4 =====
Y. Sun et al.
Fig. 2. UAV task allocation and flight trajectories under the UAV Fixed Nest Station mode.
accepted and rigorously validated paradigm in macroscopic, long-
horizon scheduling. As demonstrated by Cheng et al. (2020), em-
bedding non-linear aerodynamic dynamics directly into large-scale 
multi-node routing leads to severe computational intractability. For 
macro-level scheduling where UAVs maintain a steady cruising speed 
for the vast majority of the flight, the linear approximation accurately 
captures the core physical energy boundaries without inducing dimen-
sional explosion, ensuring both mathematical rigor and algorithmic 
solvability.
Definition 3. The path distance considered in this paper is the two-
dimensional Euclidean distance at a constant flight altitude. The ver-
tical movement time required for tower inspection (ascending and 
descending) is incorporated into the fixed node inspection time 𝑇
(
𝜏𝑣 𝑖
)
.
3.2. Mixed-integer linear programming formulation
To rigorously quantify the PIPUFN, we formulate PIPUFN as a 
Mixed-Integer Linear Programming (MILP) model. The objective func-
tion in this paper is written as follows:
min
∑
𝑡∈𝑇
∑
(𝑖,𝑗)∈𝐸
∑
𝑟∈𝑅𝑡
𝑑𝑖𝑗 𝑥𝑡𝑟
𝑖𝑗 (1)
∑
𝑗∈𝑉
∑
𝑟∈𝑅𝑡
𝑥𝑡𝑟
𝑖𝑗 =
∑
𝑗∈𝑉
∑
𝑟∈𝑅𝑡
𝑥𝑡𝑟
𝑗𝑖 ∀𝑖 ∈ 𝑉 , 𝑡 ∈ 𝑇 (2)
∑
𝑗∈𝑉
∑
𝑟∈𝑅𝑡
𝑥𝑡𝑟
0𝑗 =
∑
𝑗∈𝑉
∑
𝑟∈𝑅𝑡
𝑥𝑡𝑟
𝑗0 𝑡 ∈ 𝑇 (3)
∑
𝑗∈𝑉
𝑥𝑡𝑟
0𝑗 = 1 𝑡 ∈ 𝑇 , 𝑟 ∈ 𝜂𝑡 (4)
∑
𝑗∈𝑉
𝑥𝑡𝑟
𝑗0 = 1 𝑡 ∈ 𝑇 , 𝑟 ∈ 𝜂𝑡 (5)
𝑦𝑡
𝑖 ≤
∑
𝑗∈𝑉
𝑥𝑡𝑟
𝑗𝑖 ∀𝑖 ∈ 𝑉 ∖{ 𝑣0}, 𝑡 ∈ 𝑇 (6)
𝑦𝑡
𝑖 = 1 ∀ 𝑣𝑖 ∈ 𝑉𝑆 , 𝑡 ∈ 𝑇 (7)
∑
𝑡∈𝑊𝑘
𝑦𝑡
𝑖 ≥ 1 𝑣𝑖 ∈ 𝑉𝑇 , 𝑊𝑘 = {7𝑘 + 1, … , 7(𝑘 + 1)}, 𝑘 = 0, … , 3 (8)
∑
𝑡∈𝑇
𝑦𝑡
𝑖 ≥ 1 ∀ 𝑣𝑖 ∈ 𝑉𝐷 (9)
𝑦𝑡1
𝑖 + 𝑦𝑡2
𝑖 ≤ 1 𝑣𝑖 ∈ 𝑉𝑇 , 0 < 𝑡 2 − 𝑡1 < 7 (10)
𝑢𝑡𝑟
𝑖 − 𝑢𝑡𝑟
𝑗 + | 𝑉 | 𝑥𝑡𝑟
𝑖𝑗 ≤ | 𝑉 | − 1 ∀ 𝑖, 𝑗 ∈ 𝑉 ⧵ {𝑣0}, 𝑖 ≠ 𝑗, 𝑡 ∈ 𝑇 , 𝑟 ∈ 𝑅𝑡 (11)
∑
(𝑖,𝑗)∈𝑝𝑎𝑡ℎ𝜂𝑡
( 𝑑𝑖𝑗
𝑣𝑓 𝑙𝑦
+ 𝜏𝑗
)
≤ 𝐵𝑚𝑎𝑥 𝑝𝑎𝑡ℎ𝜂𝑡 ∈ 𝑃𝑡 (12)
𝜂𝑡 ≤ 𝜂max (13)
𝑟𝑡+1
𝑖 = 𝑟𝑡
𝑖 − 𝑦𝑡
𝑖 𝑖 ∈ 𝑉 ∖{ 𝑣0}, 𝑡 ∈ 𝑇 (14)
The objective function (1) aims to minimize the total path length of 
all paths in 𝑇 days. In this model, 𝑥𝑡𝑟
𝑖𝑗 is a binary decision variable, 
which equals 1 if the UAV flies from node 𝑖 to node 𝑗 on the 𝑡th 
day during the 𝑟th inspection round, and 0 otherwise. Similarly, 𝑦𝑡
𝑖
is a binary variable that takes the value 1 if node 𝑖 is inspected on 
the tth day, and 0 otherwise. These variables jointly determine the 
daily flight routes and inspection schedule of the UAVs. Constraint (2) 
is a flow balance constraint that ensures that UAV at each node is 
able to inspect and depart. Constraint (3) shows that the number of 
UAV depart from the UAV Fixed Nest Station and return to the UAV 
Fixed Nest Station should be same. Constraints (4)–(5) show that each 
inspection by UAV requires it to depart from and return to the UAV 
Fixed Nest Station. Constraint (6) shows the correlation of decision 
variables. Constraint (7) shows that one inspection is required daily at 
the substation. Constraint (8) shows that transmission towers require 
an inspection weekly. Constraint (9) shows that distribution poles need 
only one inspection during the period. Constraint (10) indicate the lim-
itation of period interval between transmission towers and substations. 
Constraint (11) is the sub-tour elimination constraint. Constraint (12) 
indicates that the total inspection time of a single path cannot exceed 
the UAV battery endurance. Constraint (13) limits the number of daily 
flights to within the maximum allowable limit. Constraint (14) outlines 
the update mechanism for the remaining inspection time of nodes. The 
above constraints (2)–(14) can strictly limit the PIPUFN.
4. A computational framework based on deep reinforcement
learning
The formulation in Section 3 shows that the PIPUFN is a combi-
natorial optimization problem characterized by high-dimensional state 
spaces and strong spatiotemporal coupling. As the network scale and 
planning horizon increase, the solution space grows exponentially, 
making direct solution approaches difficult in practice. Moreover, con-
ventional heuristics often exhibit myopic behavior and fail to account 
Engineering Applications of Artiϧcial Intelligence 179 (2026) 115219 
4 

===== PAGE 5 =====
Y. Sun et al.
for dependencies in periodic scheduling. In this paper, we propose a 
deep reinforcement learning framework, DPTARL, which is built upon 
Advantage Actor-Critic (A2C) learning paradigm.
4.1. Markov decision process
PIPUFN can be modeled as a Markov decision process 𝑀 =
(𝑆, , 𝑃 ,, 𝛾), where 𝑆 is the state space,  is the action space, 𝑃
is the set of locations,  ∶ 𝑆 ×  → R is the reward function, 
and 𝛾 is the discount factor. As this problem involves a long decision 
horizon, the agent state must be captured in real-time. Thus, the state 
space is divided into three components: the static tower state space 
𝑆𝑠𝑡𝑎𝑡𝑖𝑐 ∈ 𝑅2×(𝑛+1), the dynamic tower state space 𝑆𝑑𝑦𝑛𝑎𝑚𝑖𝑐
⌢𝑡 ∈ 𝑁 2×(𝑛+1)
and the UAV state space 𝐶 𝑈 𝐴𝑉⌢𝑡 ∈ 𝑅3. The full state can be expressed as 
𝑆 = (𝑆𝑠𝑡𝑎𝑡𝑖𝑐, 𝑆𝑑𝑦𝑛𝑎𝑚𝑖𝑐 , 𝐶𝑈 𝐴𝑉 ).
The concept of moment 
⌢
𝑡 is introduced in the Markov decision 
process of this paper. The state at the moment 
⌢
𝑡 is denoted as 𝑠⌢𝑡  and 
the action is denoted as 𝑎⌢𝑡  (𝑎⌢𝑡 = 0 represents the UAV returns to the 
nest and 𝑎⌢𝑡  represents the node 𝑖 visited by the current action). The 
position at the moment 
⌢
𝑡 is denoted as 𝑝⌢𝑡 . Since the state space 𝑆
consists of three parts, the state notation 𝑠⌢𝑡  at moment 
⌢
𝑡 can be written 
as 𝑠⌢𝑡 = ( 𝑠𝑠𝑡𝑎𝑡𝑖𝑐 , 𝑠𝑑𝑦𝑛𝑎𝑚𝑖𝑐
⌢𝑡 , 𝑐𝑈 𝐴𝑉⌢𝑡 ) ∈ , where 𝑠𝑠𝑡𝑎𝑡𝑖𝑐 represents the location 
information of all nodes and is used as a static state space because the 
location of nodes are fixed. 𝑠dynamic
⌢𝑡 =
[
𝑟
⌢𝑡
𝑖 , 𝑙
⌢𝑡
𝑖
]
 consists of two parts: 
the number of remaining inspections 𝑟
⌢𝑡
𝑖  at moment 
⌢
𝑡 and the time 
of the last inspection 𝑙
⌢𝑡
𝑖 . 𝑐𝑈 𝐴𝑉⌢𝑡 = ( 𝑏⌢𝑡 , 𝑝⌢𝑡 , 𝑑⌢𝑡 ) represents the real time 
information of the UAV at moment 
⌢
𝑡 , which consists of three parts: the 
current power of the UAV 𝑏⌢𝑡 , the current position of the UAV 𝑝⌢𝑡  and 
the current number of day 𝑑⌢𝑡 .
4.2. Dynamic state pruning architecture
Given the large solution space of the PIPUFN, we introduce a 
dynamic state pruning architecture (DSP) to effectively reduce the 
decision space and improve computational efficiency. The DSP operates 
by dynamically restricting the set of admissible actions at each decision 
step based on the current system state. Since each action execution 
induces a state transition of inspection nodes, the admissible action 
set is adaptively updated throughout the decision process. Specifically, 
the DSP is implemented through a binary pruning indicator 𝑀𝑖, where 
𝑀𝑖 = 1  indicates that node 𝑖 remains admissible for selection and 
𝑀𝑖 = 0 indicates that node 𝑖 is pruned from the current decision space. 
The overall pruning indicator is composed of three components: initial 
mask 𝑀 init
𝑖 , time mask 𝑀 time
𝑖 , and energy mask 𝑀 energy
𝑖 .
𝑀 𝑖𝑛𝑖𝑡
𝑖 = (𝑟0
𝑖 > 0) ∧ (𝑐𝑖 ≠ 𝑁𝑜𝑛𝑒), (15)
𝑀 𝑡𝑖𝑚𝑒
𝑖 = 𝑀 𝑡𝑖𝑚𝑒1
𝑖 ∨ 𝑀 𝑡𝑖𝑚𝑒2
𝑖 ∨ 𝑀 𝑡𝑖𝑚𝑒3
𝑖 , (16)
𝑀 time1
𝑖 = 𝑙𝑡
𝑖 ≠ 𝑡 ∀v𝑖 ∈ 𝑉𝑆 , (17)
𝑀 time2
𝑖 = ( 𝑙𝑡
𝑖 = −1) ∨ ( 𝑡 − 𝑙𝑡
𝑖 ≥ 7) ∀𝑣𝑖 ∈ 𝑉𝑇 , (18)
𝑀 time3
𝑖 = 𝑙𝑡
𝑖 ≤ 0 ∀ 𝑣𝑖 ∈ 𝑉𝐷. (19)
Eq. (15) indicates that the number of remaining inspections of node 
𝑖 is greater than 0 and the node is a non-invalid node. The generation of 
time mask is mainly constrained by the inspection period requirements 
of substations, transmission towers and distribution poles. Eq. (16) 
indicates that the time mask of node 𝑖 needs to satisfy at least one 
of the cases 𝑀 𝑡𝑖𝑚𝑒1
𝑖 , 𝑀 𝑡𝑖𝑚𝑒2
𝑖  and 𝑀 𝑡𝑖𝑚𝑒3
𝑖 . The time mask constraints 
for substations, transmission towers, and distribution poles can be 
expressed as (17)–(19).
𝑀 𝑒𝑛𝑒𝑟𝑔𝑦
𝑖 = ( 𝐸𝑡𝑜𝑡𝑎𝑙
𝑖 ≤ 𝑏⌢𝑡
) , (20)
𝛥𝑡𝑚𝑜𝑣𝑒 =
‖‖‖‖
(
𝑥𝑝⌢𝑡
, 𝑦𝑝⌢𝑡
)
−
(
𝑥𝑝⌢𝑡 +1, 𝑦𝑝⌢𝑡 +1
) ‖‖‖‖
𝑣𝑓 𝑙𝑦
, (21)
𝛥𝑡𝑟𝑒𝑡𝑢𝑟𝑛 =
‖‖‖‖
(
𝑥𝑝⌢𝑡 +1
, 𝑦𝑝⌢𝑡 +1
)
− ( 𝑥0, 𝑦0
) ‖‖‖‖
𝑣𝑓 𝑙𝑦
, (22)
𝐸𝑡𝑜𝑡𝑎𝑙
𝑖 = 𝜌 ⋅ (𝛥𝑡𝑚𝑜𝑣𝑒 + 𝑇 (𝜏𝑎̂𝑡
) + 𝛥𝑡𝑟𝑒𝑡𝑢𝑟𝑛). (23)
Eq. (20) indicates that the remaining power of UAV in node 𝑖 at 
moment 
⌢
𝑡 . Eq. (21) calculates the time required to constrain the flight 
from position 𝑝⌢𝑡  to the next position 𝑝⌢𝑡 +1. Eq. (22) calculates the time 
required to fly back to the UAV Fixed Nest Station from position 𝑝⌢𝑡 +1. 
Eq. (23) calculates the total energy 𝐸𝑡𝑜𝑡𝑎𝑙
𝑖  required to ensure that the 
UAV has enough power to visit node 𝑖 (position 𝑝⌢𝑡 ) for inspection 
and safely return to the Fixed Nest Station. Specifically, the total time 
duration of this process is scaled by the constant power rate 𝜌 to 
obtain the equivalent energy consumption, where 𝑇
(
𝜏𝑎⌢𝑡
)
 stands for 
the required inspection time at node 𝑖 at moment 
⌢
𝑡 . A special case arises 
when the sum of all node masks equals 0. In this case, the nest mask 
is set to 1, allowing the UAV to return to the UAV Fixed Nest Station. 
This case is expressed as Eq. (24). 
𝑀0 = 1,
𝑁∑
𝑖=1
𝑀𝑖 = 0. (24)
During the inspection process, the feasibility status of each inspec-
tion node evolves dynamically as system states change. The proposed 
DSP updates the admissible decision set accordingly to reflect vari-
ations induced by the current system state. By continuously pruning 
infeasible nodes from the decision space, the DSP substantially reduces 
the effective solution space and facilitates the generation of feasible 
action sequences for subsequent policy learning. The pseudocode of the 
dynamic state pruning architecture is presented as Algorithm 1.
Algorithm 1: Dynamic State Pruning Architecture
1 Initialize 𝑀 init
𝑖 ;
2 for each node 𝑖 ∈ {1, … , 𝑛} do
// Time constraint verification:
3 if 𝑣𝑖 ∈ 𝑉𝑆 then
4 𝑀 time
𝑖 ← I[𝑙(𝑡)
𝑖 ≠ {𝑑𝑡}];
5 end 
6 else if 𝑣𝑖 ∈ 𝑉𝑇 then
7 𝑀 time
𝑖 ← I[𝑙𝑡
𝑖 = −1 ∨ ( 𝑑𝑡 − 𝑙𝑡
𝑖 ≥ 7)];
8 end 
9 else if 𝑣𝑖 ∈ 𝑉𝐷 then
10 𝑀 time
𝑖 ← I[𝑙𝑡
𝑖 ≤ 0];
11 end 
// Energy constraint verification:
12 𝑀 energy
𝑖 ← (𝐸val
𝑖 ≤ 𝐸𝑖);
// Action mask:
13 𝑀𝑖[𝑖] ← 𝑀 init
𝑖 ∧ 𝑀 time
𝑖 ∧ 𝑀 energy
𝑖 ;
14 end 
15 if ∑𝑀𝑖 = 0 then
16 𝑀𝑖[0] ← 1;
17 end 
4.3. State transfer rules
With the exception of the static state, others need to be updated in 
real time at the end of each time step 
⌢
𝑡 . To address this situation, this 
paper designs state transfer rules for problem characteristics. For ease 
of understanding, the state transfer process is divided into state transfer 
𝑓nest(𝑠⌢𝑡 , 𝑎⌢𝑡 ) in the case of UAV returns to the UAV Fixed Nest Station 
and state transfer 𝑓inspect(𝑠⌢𝑡 , 𝑎⌢𝑡 ) when UAV performs inspections. The 
state transfer expression can be expressed as Eq. (25). 
𝑠⌢𝑡 +1 = 𝑓 (𝑠⌢𝑡 , 𝑎⌢𝑡 ) =
{
𝑓nest(𝑠⌢𝑡 , 𝑎⌢𝑡 ) 𝑎⌢𝑡 = 0
𝑓inspect(𝑠⌢𝑡 , 𝑎⌢𝑡 ) 𝑎⌢𝑡 ≠ 0.
(25)
Engineering Applications of Artiϧcial Intelligence 179 (2026) 115219 
5 

===== PAGE 6 =====
Y. Sun et al.
When the UAV returns to the UAV Fixed Nest Station, the battery is 
fully restored to 𝐵max and the position is updated to the UAV Fixed 
Nest Station 𝑝⌢𝑡+1 = 0 . If the number of executed missions for the 
day satisfies 𝜂⌢𝑡 ≥ 𝜂max, then the date is updated to the next day 
with 𝑑⌢𝑡+1 = 𝑑⌢𝑡 + 1 . Moreover, the number of executed tasks for the 
day is updated by 𝜂⌢𝑡+1 = (( 𝜂⌢𝑡 + 1) mod 𝜂max) + 1 . During inspection, 
the battery level of UAV is updated according to the flight time and 
the inspection time. The rule for updating the battery level is 𝑏⌢𝑡+1 =
max
(
𝑏⌢𝑡 −
(
𝛥𝑡move + 𝑇 (𝜏𝑎⌢𝑡
)
)
, 0
)
. The inspection count for the target 
node is reduced by 𝑟
⌢𝑡 +1
𝑎⌢𝑡
= max
(
𝑟
⌢𝑡
𝑎⌢𝑡
− 1, 0
)
, and the date of inspection 
is recorded as 𝑙
⌢𝑡 +1
𝑎⌢𝑡
= 𝑑⌢𝑡 . The position of UAV is updated to the 
currently inspected node if there is still sufficient battery to return 
𝑝⌢𝑡 +1 = 𝑎⌢𝑡 .
4.4. DPTARL architecture
The DPTARL framework adopts an A2C learning paradigm as its 
underlying optimization structure. Within this framework, the DPTARL-
Actor module is organized as an architectural structure consisting of 
a Feature Encoder and a topology-aware attention (TAA) decision 
module.
To process the environmental state information, the encoder is 
employed to extract compact feature representations. The input tensor 
is denoted as 𝑋𝐹 ∈ R𝐵×𝐶×𝐿, where 𝐵 denotes the batch size, 𝐿
represents the sequence length, and 𝐶 corresponds to the total number 
of input channels derived from the static, dynamic, and UAV state 
components. To solve potential dimensional mismatches between the 
input and output feature representations during deep convolution, a 
shortcut connection mechanism is introduced, as defined in Eq. (26). 
The detailed formulations of the associated convolutional operations 
are provided in Appendix  B. 
𝑋shortcut =
{
CovID(𝑋𝐹 ) if 𝐶 ≠ 𝐻
𝑋𝐹 otherwise.
(26)
Based on this architecture, the encoding process handles heteroge-
neous state information by separately processing the static state 𝑠𝑠𝑡𝑎𝑡𝑖𝑐
and the dynamic state 𝑠𝑑𝑦𝑛𝑎𝑚𝑖𝑐 , which are subsequently fused into a 
unified embedding tensor 𝐸. The corresponding computation steps are 
defined in Eqs. (27)–(29). The resulting fused feature 𝐸 provides the 
input representation for the subsequent decision-making process.
𝐸𝑠 = Encoder(𝑠static), (27)
𝐸𝑑 = Encoder(𝑠dynamic), (28)
𝐸 = 𝐸𝑠 ⊕ 𝐸𝑑 . (29)
Beyond the environmental embedding 𝐸, the sequential decision 
process requires an appropriate initialization of the decoder state. To 
this end, a dedicated initialization module is introduced to process 
the learnable parameter tensor 𝑑init ∈ 𝑅𝐶×1 and generate the initial 
decoder hidden state. The corresponding computation is given by ℎ0 =
Encoderdecoder(𝑑init), where Encoderdecoder denotes the network mod-
ule used for decoder state initialization. The detailed computational 
procedure of this module is provided in Appendix  C
With the state features extracted, the decision-making stage is gov-
erned by the interaction between the DSP and the TAA module. As 
described in Section 4.2, the DSP dynamically delineates the feasi-
ble region of the high-dimensional state space. Operating within this 
feasibility constrained space, TAA serves as a differentiable attention 
module that models dependency patterns among heterogeneous nodes 
and maps the resulting attention weights into a stochastic policy. By 
integrating feasibility information provided by DSP, TAA exploits struc-
tural characteristics of the power network and enables the generation 
of daily task sequences that are both physically feasible and structurally 
consistent. The mathematical formulation of the TAA is defined in 
Eqs. (30)–(33).
𝑞 = 𝑊 𝑇
𝑞 ℎ𝑑𝑒𝑐 , (30)
𝑘𝑖 = 𝑊 ⊤
𝑘 𝑒𝑖, (31)
𝑢𝑖 = 𝐯⊤ tanh(𝑞 + 𝑘𝑖), (32)
𝑝𝑖 = 𝑒𝑢𝑖
∑𝑁
𝑗=1 𝑒𝑢𝑗
⋅ M𝑖 + (1 − M𝑖) ⋅ (−∞). (33)
In these equations, ℎ𝑑𝑒𝑐 represents the hidden state of the decoder 
and ℎ0 is initial input, 𝑒𝑖 represents the fusion feature of node 𝑖, 𝑊𝑞 ∈
𝑅𝐻×𝐻 and 𝑊𝑘 ∈ 𝑅𝐻×𝐻 is the projection matrix, 𝐯 ∈ R𝐻 is a learnable 
weight vector used to project hidden layer features into scalar scores, 
and 𝑝𝑖 represents the probability distribution calculated for node 𝑖. TAA 
calculates the score of each node based on ℎdec and 𝐸. The probability 
distribution of each node is obtained after mask processing and softmax 
operation. As the decision-making process progresses, the updated ℎdec
and fixed fusion features 𝐸 are fed into TAA for calculation together. 
The pseudocode of TAA can be represented as Algorithm 2.
Algorithm 2: Algorithm of Topology-Aware Attention
1 Initialize the decoding state: 𝒉dec ← 𝒉0;
2 Feature fusion:
3 𝐸 ← 𝐸𝑠 ⊕ 𝐸𝑑 ;
4 Generate the query vector:
5 𝒒 ← 𝑊𝑞𝒉dec;
6 for each node 𝑖 ∈ {1, … , 𝑛} do
7 Generate the key vector:
8 𝒌𝑖 ← 𝑊𝑘𝒆𝑖;
9 Calculate the attention score:
10 𝑢𝑖 ← 𝜽⊤ tanh(𝒒 + 𝒌𝑖);
11 Mask processing:
12 𝑢𝑖 ← 𝑢𝑖 ⋅ 𝑀𝑖[𝑖] − ∞ ⋅ (1 − 𝑀𝑖[𝑖]);
13 end 
14 Probability normalization:
15 𝑝𝑖 ← softmax({𝑢𝑖}𝑛
𝑖=1);
The proposed TAA module is different from standard attention 
variants. Standard self-attention treats the input as an unstructured 
sequence. It does not explicitly model physical connectivity. In contrast, 
TAA embeds the topology of the power grid into its representation. 
This allows the routing policy to reflect actual physical reachability 
rather than simple feature similarity. Standard Graph Attention Net-
works (GATs) usually focus on local one-hop neighborhoods for static 
feature aggregation. TAA, however, maintains a global receptive field. 
As a result, the DRL agent can make long-horizon sequential decisions 
across the entire network while balancing routing efficiency and local 
topological constraints.
In this paper, the probability of an UAV flying to node 𝑖 at mo-
ment 
⌢
𝑡 can be defined as 𝜋⌢𝑡 (𝑎⌢𝑡 ∣ 𝑠⌢𝑡 ) = 𝑇 𝐴𝐴(ℎ0, 𝐸). Based on the 
decision process of DPTARL-Actor, the calculation of value estimates 
is mainly performed in the DPTARL-Critic module. Specifically, the 
spliced feature is defined as 𝐹 = [ 𝐸𝑠; 𝐸𝑑 ]. Subsequently, a feature 
compression operation is performed on the basis of this concatenation 
and global average pooling is applied along the third dimension. The 
pooling process is defined as ̄𝐹 = 1
𝐿
∑𝐿
𝑙=1 𝐹∶,∶,𝑙. Then, the feature ̄𝐹
is passed through two fully connected layers with a ReLU activation in 
between. The final value prediction defined as 𝑉𝜃(𝑡) = 𝑊2 ⋅ReLU(𝑊1 ⋅ ̄𝐹 ).
Moreover, this paper proposes a composite reward mechanism to 
calculate rewards in every aspect of PIPUFN. The mechanism is eval-
uated compositely from three dimensions: single-step reward, global 
reward, and path penalty. Specifically, the single-step reward integrates 
Engineering Applications of Artiϧcial Intelligence 179 (2026) 115219 
6 

===== PAGE 7 =====
Y. Sun et al.
three components: base reward, hard penalty, and efficiency penalty. 
Since the action space of every time step is large, the single-step reward 
is accumulated in 𝑇 days. The base reward is defined as 𝑅base = 𝑤𝑖 ⋅ 𝑛𝑐, 
where 𝑤𝑖 is the base reward for inspecting node 𝑖 and 𝑛𝑐 denotes the 
total number of inspection points completed within 𝑇 days. To ensure 
inspection standards, a hard penalty 𝑅hard = 𝑝l-hard ⋅𝑓l-hard is introduced 
to penalize transmission towers and distribution poles that are not 
inspected to requirements, where 𝑝l-hard is the unit penalty for missing 
inspections of transmission towers during the first week and 𝑓l-hard is 
the frequency of such occurrences. Additionally, the efficiency reward 
is designed to penalize redundant flights and imbalanced task distribu-
tions. The efficiency reward is defined as 𝑅eff = ∑𝑛
𝑖=1
∑𝑇
𝑡=1
∑𝑛max
𝑚=1 (𝑝l-eff ⋅
𝑓 𝑡
𝑚)+ 𝑝2-eff ⋅𝑓std, where 𝑝l-eff is the unit penalty for redundant flights on a 
single day, 𝑓 𝑡
𝑚 is the number of redundant flights on the 𝑡th day during 
the 𝑚th flight, 𝑝2-eff is the unit penalty for global task fluctuation, 
and 𝑓std represents the standard deviation of the number of flights 
per day over the 𝑇 days. To ensure full inspection, a global reward 
𝑅global = 𝑛𝑐
𝑛 ⋅ 𝑝global is also introduced, where 𝑛 is the total number 
of nodes and 𝑝global is the unit reward assigned when inspections are 
completed as required. Finally, the overall reward combines the above 
components and penalizes path length. The total reward is defined as 
 = 𝛼𝑅base −𝛽𝑅hard −𝜅𝑅eff +𝛿𝑅global −𝜉𝐷total-distance, where 𝐷total-distance
is the total path length traveled by the UAV. The process of calculating 
the mean of the advantage values in our model is defined as (34)–(37).
𝑟𝑡 = 𝑅base𝑡 − 𝑅hard𝑡 − 𝑅eff𝑡 , (34)
𝐺𝑡+𝑘 =
∑
𝑡∈𝑇
𝛾 𝑘𝑟𝑡 𝑡 ∈ 𝑇 , (35)
𝐴𝑡 = 𝐺𝑇 − 𝑉 , (36)
̃𝐴𝑡 = 𝐴𝑡 − ̄𝐴𝑡
𝜎𝐴 + 𝜗 . (37)
In Eq. (34), 𝑟𝑡 denotes the sum of single-step rewards earned on the 
𝑡th day, which is composed of three components: 𝑅base𝑡 is the total 
basic reward, 𝑅hard𝑡 is the hard penalty, and 𝑅eff𝑡 is the efficiency 
penalty obtained on the 𝑡th day. Eq. (35) defines the discounted reward 
𝐺𝑡+𝑘, where 𝛾 represents the discount factor. Meanwhile, 𝐴𝑡 in Eq. (36) 
represents the advantage value on the 𝑡th day, defined by the difference 
between 𝐺𝑇 and the value estimate 𝑉 . Eq. (37) further defines the stan-
dardized advantage value ̃𝐴𝑡, where ̄𝐴𝑡 is the mean of the advantage 
values, 𝜎𝐴 denotes their variance, and 𝜗 is a small numerical value.
In the process of calculation, the long discount sequence ignores 
the rewards in the early and middle stages. In our framework, the 
DPTARL-Actor calculates task sequences generated by time steps. We 
calculate daily rewards and discount rewards over any number of days 
when computing discounted rewards. And the DPTARL-Critic calculates 
advantage values for any number of days. The loss of DPTARL are 
defined as (38)–(40).
actor = −E [ ̃𝐴(𝑡) ⋅ log 𝜋𝜃(𝑎𝑡 ∣ 𝑠𝑡)] , (38)
critic = E
[ ( 𝑉𝜙(𝑡) − 𝐺𝑡
) 2]
, (39)
total = 𝛼 ⋅ actor + 𝛽 ⋅ critic, (40)
where log 𝜋𝜃(𝑎𝑡 ∣ 𝑠𝑡) denotes the log probability of actions output by 
the DPTARL-Actor network, actor represents the loss of the DPTARL-
Actor, critic stands for the loss of the DPTARL-Critic, and total is the 
total loss of the DPTARL. Besides 𝛼 and 𝛽 are the weight coefficients. 
The training algorithm of DPTARL can be represented as Algorithm 3 
and the framework diagram of DPTARL is shown in Fig.  3.
5. Simulation results
In Section 5, we conduct an empirical evaluation of the proposed 
DPTARL framework using real-world topological data from a regional 
power network. The performance of different methods is assessed from 
three key perspectives: total path length (Length), computation time 
Table 1
Training parameters setup.
 Parameters Values  
 Batch size 32  
 Static size 2  
 Dynamic size 2  
 Hidden size 128  
 Steps 2.0 × 105 
 𝛾 0.98  
 Active function ReLU  
 Learning rate 3 × 10−5  
(CT), and flight efficiency (FE). In this work, flight efficiency is defined 
as the ratio of the total path length to the total inspection time (i.e., the 
sum of flight time and tower inspection time), serving as a measure 
of UAV inspection utilization and an evaluation indicator for myopic 
optimization behavior. For comparative evaluation, the Adaptive Large 
Neighborhood Search (ALNS) algorithm is selected as a representative 
heuristic baseline due to its effectiveness in large-scale combinato-
rial optimization problems. In addition, Deep Q-Networks (DQN) and 
Proximal Policy Optimization (PPO) are included as representative 
deep reinforcement learning benchmarks. Finally, an ablation study is 
conducted to quantify the contributions of DSP and TAA modules in 
the DPTARL.
5.1. Parameter settings
In Section 5.1, we describe the experimental configuration to en-
sure reproducibility. The simulation environment is implemented in 
Python, with PyTorch used for neural network construction and train-
ing. The topological dataset is derived from real-world geographical 
coordinates of power infrastructure. All training and testing processes 
are conducted on a Windows 10 operating system equipped with an 
Intel Core i7-13700KF CPU (3.40 GHz), 32 GB RAM, and an NVIDIA 
GeForce RTX 4060 GPU. For comparative evaluation, a strict fairness 
protocol is adopted. The baseline deep reinforcement learning methods 
share the same feature encoder architecture and environmental state 
definitions as the proposed DPTARL framework. This design ensures 
that performance differences are attributable to the decision-making 
strategies rather than discrepancies in feature extraction. All network 
parameters are optimized using the Adam optimizer, and the detailed 
training hyperparameters are summarized in Table  1.
5.2. Analysis of training
To empirically evaluate the learning dynamics and convergence 
behavior of the proposed DPTARL framework, we analyze its training 
performance in comparison with DQN and PPO. To ensure a fair and 
controlled comparison, all methods are trained under identical environ-
mental settings and share the same feature encoder architecture. Fig.  4 
reports the evolution of the average reward over 2.0×10 5 training steps.
As shown in Fig.  4, the three algorithms exhibit different learn-
ing behaviors, reflecting their distinct optimization mechanisms and 
inductive biases. The value-based DQN baseline converges to the low-
est performance level. This limitation can be attributed to the high-
dimensional and combinatorial nature of the PIPUFN. In periodic in-
spection tasks with large discrete action spaces, DQN faces substantial 
challenges in accurately estimating action-value functions, which often 
leads to overestimation bias and inefficient exploration. As a result, 
DQN struggles to capture long-horizon dependencies and fails to dis-
cover effective scheduling policies. As a policy gradient method, PPO 
demonstrates a rapid initial performance improvement. However, the 
learning curve of PPO indicates premature convergence. Although PPO 
addresses some instability issues found in value-based methods, it 
lacks explicit mechanisms to account for the topological relationships 
between inspection targets, which are important for this problem. 
Engineering Applications of Artiϧcial Intelligence 179 (2026) 115219 
7 

===== PAGE 8 =====
Y. Sun et al.
Fig. 3. DPTARL training framework.
Fig. 4. Average reward of training.
Consequently, the learned policy tends to focus on locally favorable 
decisions and exhibits limited capability in resolving the complex spa-
tiotemporal couplings required for long-horizon periodic scheduling. 
In contrast, the proposed DPTARL exhibits a more robust and sus-
tained learning trajectory. While its early stage exploration behavior 
is comparable to that of the baseline methods, DPTARL achieves a 
clear performance breakthrough at approximately 4 × 104 training steps 
and consistently surpasses PPO thereafter, converging to a significantly 
higher reward level. This progressive overtaking behavior highlights 
the effectiveness of the proposed architectural design. Specifically, 
the DSP restricts exploration to a feasibility decision space, thereby 
reducing ineffective or invalid actions, while the TAA module enables 
the policy to capture structural dependencies among heterogeneous 
nodes. The synergy of these components allows DPTARL to escape 
suboptimal local solutions and achieve more stable and higher quality 
scheduling performance.
5.3. Small-scale exact solver verification
To evaluate the solution quality of the proposed DPTARL framework 
and assess the necessity of using a DRL-based approach, we conduct 
a comparative experiment against an exact mathematical solver. The 
Engineering Applications of Artiϧcial Intelligence 179 (2026) 115219 
8 

===== PAGE 9 =====
Y. Sun et al.
Table 2
Comparison of DPTARL and the exact solver (Gurobi) on small-scale instances.
 Size Gurobi DPTARL Gap Gurobi DPTARL Gain Gurobi DPTARL 
 (| 𝑁| ) length (km) length (km) (%) FE FE (%) time (s) time (s) 
 5 144.35 152.50 5.64 4.27E−3 4.74E−3 11.01 128.5 1.78  
 10 168.45 179.30 6.44 4.05E−3 4.72E−3 16.54 >3600a 2.13  
 15 186.20 201.50 8.22 3.82E−3 4.65E−3 21.73 >3600a 2.61  
 20 205.60 224.80 9.34 3.55E−3 4.60E−3 29.58 >3600a 3.09  
a Gurobi reached the predefined time limit of 3600 s.
MILP model of the PIPUFN is implemented in the Gurobi optimizer. 
Because of the NP-hard nature of the problem, the solver time limit 
is set to 3600 s. To account for the stochasticity of the reinforcement 
learning policy, the DPTARL results are reported using the average 
performance over 10 independent runs. The comparison is conducted 
on small-scale instances with 5 to 20 uniformly distributed nodes, as 
summarized in Table  2.
The results show a clear difference in computational scalability. For 
the 5-node instance, Gurobi finds the optimal solution in 128.5 s. How-
ever, when the number of nodes increases to 10, the spatiotemporal 
coupling substantially increases the computational burden, and Gurobi 
reaches the 3600 s time limit without proving global optimality. In 
contrast, DPTARL maintains a stable inference time ranging from 1.78 
s to 3.09 s. In terms of solution quality, DPTARL shows competitive 
performance on small-scale instances. For the 5-node instance, the gap 
between DPTARL and the optimal solution is 5.64%. When the problem 
size increases to 20 nodes, the gap between DPTARL and the incumbent 
solution returned by Gurobi within the one-hour limit is 9.34%. A 
further difference can be observed in terms of flight efficiency (FE). 
Although Gurobi returns incumbent solutions with shorter path lengths 
before timing out, the corresponding flight efficiency decreases from 
0.00427 to 0.00355 as the problem size increases. By contrast, DPTARL 
consistently maintains a higher FE, remaining above 0.00460 across all 
tested scales. These results indicate that DPTARL provides a favorable 
balance between solution quality and computational efficiency, and can 
generate operationally effective schedules within seconds.
Computational Complexity Analysis: To formally justify the high 
inference efficiency demonstrated in the experiments, we analyze the 
theoretical time complexity of the proposed DPTARL framework. Dur-
ing the inference phase, the computational overhead is primarily dom-
inated by the Topology-Aware Attention (TAA) module and the Dy-
namic State Pruning (DSP) module. For an instance with 𝑁 nodes and 
a hidden feature dimension 𝑑, the self-attention mechanism in TAA 
computes the query-key dot products across all nodes, which yields a 
complexity of (𝑁 2 ⋅ 𝑑). Subsequently, the DSP module constructs the 
feasibility mask by evaluating the physical constraints of the available 
nodes, requiring a linear complexity of (𝑁) per decoding step. Across 
the entire trajectory generation, the overall asymptotic time complexity 
of DPTARL is bounded by (𝑁 2 ⋅ 𝑑). Compared to the exponential time 
complexity (2𝑁 ) typical of exact MILP solvers (e.g., Gurobi), the poly-
nomial complexity of DPTARL mathematically guarantees its superior 
scalability and millisecond-level real-time applicability in large-scale 
PIPUFN scenarios.
5.4. Comparative evaluation
In this section, we conduct a comprehensive comparative evaluation 
of the proposed DPTARL framework against a heuristic baseline ALNS 
and two representative deep reinforcement learning baselines DQN and 
PPO. Experiments are performed on four test sets (70, 80, 90, and 100 
inspection tasks). The evaluation focuses on three aspects: Length, FE, 
and CT, which together provide a comprehensive characterization of 
algorithm performance. To facilitate a quantitative comparison, Table 
3 reports the relative performance differences of the baseline methods 
with respect to DPTARL, computed as (𝑉baseline − 𝑉DPTARL)∕𝑉DPTARL ×
100%.
The average performance across different task scales is illustrated 
in Fig.  5, while the relative performance gaps between each baseline 
and DPTARL are quantitatively summarized in Table  3. As shown in 
Fig.  5(a), DPTARL consistently achieves competitive or shorter path 
length across all task scales. According to Table  3, DQN produces routes 
that are on average 8.03% longer than those generated by DPTARL, 
whereas PPO exhibits a smaller gap of 0.96%. In contrast, the path 
length obtained by ALNS is nearly identical to that of DPTARL, with 
an average difference of −0.01%, indicating that both methods exhibit 
strong spatial optimization capability.
Fig.  5(b) shows more pronounced differences in flight efficiency. 
According to Table  3, ALNS and DQN exhibit average efficiency re-
ductions of 19.89% and 14.54% relative to DPTARL, respectively, 
while PPO remains 1.93% lower. This suggests that minimizing path 
length alone does not guarantee efficient utilization of UAV flight 
time. DPTARL maintains higher operational efficiency across all task 
scales, reflecting a better balance between spatial routing and temporal 
feasibility. Fig.  5(c) reveals a substantial disparity in computation 
time. ALNS incurs a significantly higher computational cost, with an 
average time increase of 176.45% compared to DPTARL, and this gap 
widens as the problem scale increases. In contrast, the computation 
time of DPTARL remains close to that of PPO and DQN. Although 
PPO is marginally faster than DPTARL on average (−2.37%), the time 
difference is small relative to the observed gains in solution quality and 
efficiency.
As shown in Figs.  6(a) and 6(b), DQN and PPO exhibit wider 
interquartile ranges and more dispersed outliers, indicating higher vari-
ability across independent runs. This instability is particularly evident 
in flight efficiency, where learning-based baselines show noticeable 
fluctuations. In contrast, DPTARL demonstrates a compact distribution. 
The computation time distributions in Fig.  6(c) further illustrate the 
computational characteristics of different methods. ALNS consistently 
incurs the highest computation time, reflecting its limited scalability in 
large-scale instances. In contrast, DQN and PPO exhibit lower average 
computation time with very narrow interquartile ranges, indicating 
highly stable inference efficiency. DPTARL shows a moderate compu-
tation time that is higher than that of PPO and DQN, accompanied 
by a wider but still controlled dispersion. This behavior suggests that 
the additional structural reasoning introduced by the DSP and TAA 
modules incurs a certain computational overhead, while maintaining 
a predictable and bounded inference cost. In practical scenarios, this 
moderate increase in computation time is compensated by substantial 
gains in solution quality and flight efficiency, as demonstrated in 
Figs.  5 and 7. In Fig.  7(a), DPTARL solutions cluster in the lower-
left region, indicating length that are relatively short while requiring 
moderate computation time. In contrast, ALNS solutions are mainly 
distributed in the upper region due to their high computational cost, 
whereas DQN and PPO tend to spread toward the right, corresponding 
to longer path length. A similar trend is observed in Fig.  7(b), DPTARL 
occupies the upper-left region, achieving higher flight efficiency with 
comparatively shorter length. By comparison, DQN and ALNS exhibit 
lower flight efficiency under similar path length conditions. In Fig. 
7(c), DPTARL is located in a region characterized by relatively high 
flight efficiency with bounded computation time, indicating a favorable 
balance between operational efficiency and computational overhead.
Combining the quantitative results with the visual evidence, it 
can be observed that DPTARL achieves a favorable balance across all 
Engineering Applications of Artiϧcial Intelligence 179 (2026) 115219 
9 

===== PAGE 10 =====
Y. Sun et al.
Table 3
Quantitative comparison.
 Tasks ALNS vs. DPTARL DQN vs. DPTARL PPO vs. DPTARL
 Length FE CT Length FE CT Length FE CT  
 100 2.99% −19.00% 171.53% 9.84% −14.28% −13.23% 4.12% −2.28% −25.33% 
 90 1.08% −19.21% 172.55% 7.55% −14.34% 26.27% 1.11% −2.48% 11.12%  
 80 −2.14% −20.50% 201.26% 7.25% −14.66% 14.70% 1.62% −1.73% 3.50%  
 70 −1.97% −20.85% 160.46% 7.48% −14.86% 15.24% 0.23% −1.22% 1.25%  
 Average −0.01% −19.89% 176.45% 8.03% −14.54% 10.75% 0.96% −1.93% −2.37%  
Fig. 5. Comparison of macro performance metrics across different task scales.
Fig. 6. Statistical distribution and robustness comparison.
Fig. 7. Multi objective trade-off visualization.
Engineering Applications of Artiϧcial Intelligence 179 (2026) 115219 
10 

===== PAGE 11 =====
Y. Sun et al.
three evaluation dimensions. While ALNS is competitive in terms of 
path length, it suffers from excessive computation time and reduced 
operational efficiency. Standard DRL methods offer faster inference 
but exhibit inferior solution quality. By contrast, DPTARL consistently 
delivers high-quality, efficient, and stable solutions across different task 
scales, demonstrating its suitability for PIPUFN.
Algorithm 3: Training Algorithm of DPTARL
1 Initialize the policy network parameters 𝜋𝜃 of DPTARL-Actor, 
the value network parameters 𝑉𝜙 of DPTARL-Actor and the 
experience buffer 𝛺;
2 for episode = 1, … , 𝑁ep do
3 Reset the environment to obtain the initial state 
𝑠0 = (𝑠route
0 , 𝑠time
0 , 𝑠energy
0 );
4 while the terminal state is not reached do
5 Generate the action mask 𝑀𝑡 (Algorithm 1);
6 Obtain the action probability distribution 𝑃𝑡 through 
the TAA (Algorithm 2);
7 Sample an action: 𝑎𝑡 ∼ Categorical(𝑃𝑡);
8 Execute action 𝑎𝑡 to get 𝑠𝑡+1, 𝑟𝑡 = 𝑓 (𝑠𝑡, 𝑎𝑡);
9 Calculate the single-step immediate reward 𝑟𝑡;
10 Store (𝑠𝑡, 𝑎𝑡, 𝑟𝑡, 𝑠𝑡+1) into 𝛺;
11 Complete the period tasks;
12 end 
13 Calculate the value prediction: 𝑉𝜙(𝑡);
14 Calculate the discount reward: 𝐺;
15 Calculate the advantage function:  ∈ ̃𝐴𝑡;
16 Update the policy network:
17 ∇𝜃actor = E[ ⋅ log 𝜋𝜃(𝑎𝑡 ∣ 𝑠𝑡)] ;
18 Update the value network:
19 ∇𝜙critic = E[(𝑉𝜙(𝑡) − 𝐺)2] ;
20 Policy gradient update:
21 𝜃 ← 𝜃 + 𝛼∇𝜃actor, 𝜙 ← 𝜙 − 𝛽∇𝜙critic
22 end 
5.5. Ablation experiment
To systematically examine the individual and joint contributions of 
the proposed components, we conduct an extended ablation study. In 
the DPTARL framework, DSP and TAA are integrated into a unified 
architecture. To quantify their effects, we evaluate four variants:
(1) A2C, a baseline without DSP and TAA modules.
(2) NO-DSP, DPTARL without the DSP module.
(3) NO-TAA, DPTARL without the TAA module.
(4) DPTARL, the complete proposed framework.
All variants are evaluated over 10 independent runs. The quan-
titative results are summarized in Table  4, which presents the three 
performance dimensions clearly.
As shown in Fig.  8(a), DPTARL consistently achieves the shortest 
path length. Notably, the NO-TAA variant shows a clear degradation in 
spatial optimization, and its path length approaches that of the vanilla 
A2C baseline. This result indicates that DSP helps restrict the agent to 
feasible actions, whereas TAA improves its ability to capture structural 
relationships and construct compact inspection sequences.
In terms of FE, Fig.  8(b) provides further evidence on the mitigation 
of myopic optimization behavior. In this study, FE is used as a practical 
indicator of myopic optimization behavior. A higher FE suggests that 
the agent can better balance immediate rewards with long-term oper-
ational endurance. As shown in Table  4, DPTARL achieves the highest 
FE, which indicates a stronger ability to alleviate myopic decision 
tendencies. In contrast, the NO-DSP variant shows a substantial drop 
in efficiency and performs even worse than A2C. This result suggests 
that removing the physical feasibility boundaries imposed by DSP 
makes the agent more likely to pursue immediately reachable nodes, 
Table 4
Average ablation results across four model variants.
 Model Length (km) FE CT (s) 
 A2C 993.88 4.705E−3 15.26  
 NO-DSP 921.90 4.375E−3 14.42  
 NO-TAA 971.68 4.509E−3 13.99  
 DPTARL 828.52 5.171E−3 14.69  
Table 5
Sensitivity analysis of penalty multipliers.
 Penalty multiplier Length (km) FE CT (s) 
 Under-penalized (0.5×) 913.10 4.513E−3 18.15  
 DPTARL (1.0×) 828.52 5.174E−3 14.69  
 Over-penalized (2.0×) 872.97 4.416E−3 14.53  
which increases short-sighted decisions and weakens overall scheduling 
quality.
Table  4 and Fig.  8(c) show that introducing either DSP or TAA alone 
reduces computation time. Although the DPTARL framework is slightly 
slower than the single-module variants, it still maintains a stable in-
ference time. More importantly, this modest time cost is accompanied 
by clear improvements in path length and flight efficiency. Therefore, 
the combined use of DSP and TAA provides a more favorable balance 
between decision quality and computational efficiency.
Ablation results show that DSP and TAA play complementary roles 
in the proposed framework. DSP improves action feasibility and sta-
bilizes long-horizon scheduling, whereas TAA enhances structural per-
ception and sequence optimization. In DPTARL, the two modules de-
liver the best overall performance across length, flight efficiency, and 
computation time. This confirms the effectiveness of DPTARL.
5.6. Sensitivity analysis
To evaluate the robustness of the proposed composite reward mech-
anism and justify the hyperparameter settings, we conduct a sensitiv-
ity analysis on the penalty multipliers. In DPTARL, the hard penalty 
and the efficiency penalty play an important role in model training. 
We examine the effect of these penalty weights by comparing the 
base DPTARL model (1.0× multiplier) with two extreme settings: an 
under-penalized variant (0.5×) and an over-penalized variant (2.0×).
The average performance on the three core metrics is summarized in 
Table  5. The results show that the base DPTARL model (1.0×) provides 
the best overall balance, achieving the shortest path length and the 
highest flight efficiency. When the penalty multiplier is reduced to 
0.5×, the length increases substantially to 913.10 km, and the flight 
efficiency decreases to 4.513 × 10 −3. This degradation suggests that a 
weak penalty signal is insufficient to constrain the agent effectively. 
As a result, the agent is more likely to favor immediate local rewards, 
leading to redundant flights and poorer global routing efficiency. The 
weaker restriction also enlarges the effective search space, which fur-
ther increases inference time. When the penalty multiplier is increased 
to 2.0×, the length rises to 872.97 km, and the flight efficiency drops 
to the lowest value among all settings (4.416 × 10 −3). In this over-
penalized setting, the agent becomes overly conservative. To avoid 
large penalties, it tends to prioritize immediate constraint satisfaction 
over path quality, which leads to inefficient flight patterns such as 
zigzagging routes or premature returns to the UAV Fixed Nest Station.
Overall, these results indicate that the 1.0× penalty setting in DP-
TARL achieves the most favorable balance between physical constraint 
enforcement and global routing efficiency. This finding supports the ra-
tionality of the reward design and shows that appropriate penalty scal-
ing is important for mitigating short-sighted decisions in long-horizon 
scheduling.
Engineering Applications of Artiϧcial Intelligence 179 (2026) 115219 
11 

===== PAGE 12 =====
Y. Sun et al.
Fig. 8. Result of ablation experiment.
6. Conclusion
This paper studies the highly constrained PIPUFN problem and 
presents the DPTARL framework. The proposed framework addresses 
the computational limitations of exact solvers and reduces the myopic 
optimization tendencies of traditional DRL methods. The main strength 
of the framework lies in the joint use of DSP and TAA. DSP enforces 
physical feasibility by pruning invalid actions. TAA then captures global 
topological dependencies within the resulting feasible decision space. 
In this way, the framework supports long-horizon routing decisions and 
reduces reliance on manually designed soft penalties. Extensive exper-
iments demonstrate the effectiveness of the proposed framework. In 
small-scale verification, DPTARL achieves near-optimal performance, 
with an optimality gap below 10%, while providing substantial infer-
ence acceleration over the exact MILP solver. In large-scale evaluations 
against representative baselines, including PPO, DQN, and ALNS, DP-
TARL also shows clear performance gains. It reduces the average path 
length by 16.64% and improves flight efficiency by 9.89%. In addition, 
the visualization of the 28-day continuous UAV flight trajectories and 
the aggregated spatial coverage heatmap (see Figs.  D.9 and D.10) 
collectively provide further evidence of the engineering feasibility. 
These visual results confirm that the proposed DPTARL framework 
can successfully execute precise micro-level routing while consistently 
satisfying all heterogeneous periodic requirements throughout the long-
horizon operation. Beyond power inspection, this work provides a 
generalizable perspective on applying deep reinforcement learning to 
large-scale, periodic, and long-horizon scheduling problems.
CRediT authorship contribution statement
Yuxuan Sun: Writing – review & editing, Writing – original draft, 
Visualization, Methodology, Formal analysis, Conceptualization. Feng 
Gao: Supervision, Methodology. Yongjie Xue: Validation, Supervision. 
Bin Yu: Conceptualization.
Funding
This work was supported by the Fundamental and Interdisciplinary 
Disciplines Breakthrough Plan of the Ministry of Education of China 
(JYB2025XDXM104) and the National Natural Science Foundation of 
China (Grant No. 52232011).
Declaration of competing interest
The authors declare the following financial interests/personal rela-
tionships which may be considered as potential competing interests: Bin 
Yu reports financial support was provided by National Natural Science 
Foundation of China (52232011 and 52225209). If there are other 
authors, they declare that they have no known competing financial in-
terests or personal relationships that could have appeared to influence 
the work reported in this paper.
Appendix A. Notations used in this paper
The notations used throughout the model formulation and algorithm 
design are listed in Table  A.6.
Appendix B. Calculational process of convolution operation
The steps in the Encoder begin with the convolution operation 
defined as (B.1)–(B.3). 
𝐻Con = CovID(𝑋𝐹 ) = 𝑊1 ⋅ 𝑋𝐹 + 𝑏1, (B.1)
where 𝑊1 ∈ 𝑅𝐻×𝐶×𝐿 represents the weight matrix, 𝑏1 ∈ 𝑅𝐻 represents 
the bias vector, and 𝐻 represents the number of output channels. Next, 
the batch normalization operation is defined as: 
𝐻𝐵𝑁 = 𝐵𝑁 (𝐻𝐶𝑜𝑛 ) = 𝜒1
𝐻𝐶𝑜𝑛 − 𝜇1
√
𝜎2
1 + 𝜀
+ 𝛽1, (B.2)
where 𝜒1, 𝛽1 are learnable parameters; 𝜇1, 𝜎2
1 are the mean and variance 
of the current batch and 𝜀 is a very small constant. Finally ReLU 
operation is performed on the normalized result defined as: 
𝑌 = ReLU(𝐻𝐵𝑁 ) = max(0 , 𝐻𝐵𝑁 ). (B.3)
Appendix C. Calculational process of Encoderdecoder
The computational process of Encoderdecoder can be represented as 
(C.1)–(C.4).
𝑋𝐹 =
{
𝑋in if 𝑋in ∈ (𝐵, 𝐶, 1),
𝑋in ⋅ permute(0, 2, 1) otherwise,
(C.1)
𝐻1 = ReLU(𝐵𝑁 (Conv1D(𝑋𝐹 ))), (C.2)
𝐻2 = 𝐵𝑁 (Conv1D(𝐻1)), (C.3)
ℎ0 = ReLU(𝐻2 + 𝑋shortcut) ∈ 𝑅𝐵×𝐻×𝐴. (C.4)
Appendix D. Visualization of global inspection coverage
In the considered PIPUFN scenario, the UAV can execute up to seven 
sorties per day over a 100-node network within a 28-day scheduling 
horizon. To intuitively demonstrate the effectiveness of the proposed 
path planning method, we first visualize the actual UAV trajectories 
over the entire period, as shown in Fig.  D.9. This visualization di-
rectly presents the spatial routing decisions generated by the DPTARL 
Engineering Applications of Artiϧcial Intelligence 179 (2026) 115219 
12 

===== PAGE 13 =====
Y. Sun et al.
Table A.6
Notations.
 Notation Definition  
 𝑉 Set of nodes, where 𝑉 = 𝑉𝑆
⋃ 𝑉𝑇
⋃ 𝑉𝐷
⋃ 𝑣0.  
 𝑉𝑆 Set of substation nodes.  
 𝑉𝑇 Set of transmission nodes.  
 𝑉𝐷 Set of distribution nodes.  
 𝑃 𝑜𝑠 Set of node coordinate, where 𝑃 𝑜𝑠 = {𝑋, 𝑌 }.  
 𝑋 Set of horizontal coordinates.  
 𝑌 Set of vertical coordinates.  
 𝐸 Set of arcs.  
 𝐺 Set of graph structure.  
 𝜂 Set of daily inspections.  
 𝑃𝑡 Set of path on the 𝑡th day.  
 𝑇 Set of cycle days, where 𝑇 = {1, 2, … , 28}.  
 𝑀 Markov decision process.  
 𝑆 Set of state-space.  
  Set of action-space.  
 𝑃 Set of position-space.  
  Set of rewards.  
 𝜈𝑖 Power nodes to be inspected, where 𝑣𝑖 ∈ 𝑉 .  
 𝜈0 UAV Fixed Nest Station node.  
 𝜌𝑣 Total number of inspection requirements for each type of node, where 𝑣𝑖 ∈ 𝑉 .  
 𝑟𝑡
𝑖 Remaining number of required inspections for node 𝑖 on 𝑡th day.  
 𝑇
(
𝜏𝑣 𝑖
)
Single inspection time consumed of node 𝑖, where 𝑇 ( 𝜏𝑣𝑆
) = 600 s, 𝑇 ( 𝜏𝑣𝑇
) = 300 s, 𝑇 ( 𝜏𝑣𝐷
) = 60 s. 
 𝑣𝑓 𝑙𝑦 UAV flight speed, where 𝑣𝑓 𝑙𝑦 = 0.01 km∕s.  
 𝑑𝑖𝑗 Euclidean distance from node 𝑖 to 𝑗.  
 𝑡𝑖𝑗 Flight time from node 𝑖 to 𝑗.  
 𝐵max Maximum UAV battery endurance, where 𝐵max = 3000 s.  
 𝑝𝑜𝑠𝑖 Plane coordinates of node 𝑖.  
 𝜂max Maximum number of flights per day.  
 𝜂𝑡 Number of missions carried out on 𝑡th day.  
 𝛾 Discount factor, where 𝛾 ∈ [0, 1).  
 𝑠⌢𝑡 Characteristics of the state at moment 
⌢
𝑡.  
 𝑠𝑠𝑡𝑎𝑡𝑖𝑐 Characteristics of static state.  
 𝑠𝑑𝑦𝑛𝑎𝑚𝑖𝑐
⌢𝑡 Characteristics of the dynamic state at moment 
⌢
𝑡.  
 𝑐𝑈 𝐴𝑉
⌢𝑡 Characteristics of the UAV state at the moment 
⌢
𝑡.  
 𝑏⌢𝑡 Remaining power of the UAV at moment 
⌢
𝑡.  
 𝑝⌢𝑡 Position of the UAV at moment 
⌢
𝑡.  
 𝑑⌢𝑡 Number of days at moment 
⌢
𝑡.  
 𝑟
⌢𝑡
𝑖 Remaining number of required inspections for node 𝑖 at moment 
⌢
𝑡.  
 𝑙
⌢𝑡
𝑖 Inspection date of node 𝑖 at moment 
⌢
𝑡.  
 𝑎⌢𝑡 Action at moment 
⌢
𝑡.  
 𝑀𝑖 Action mask for node 𝑖.  
 𝑀 𝑖𝑛𝑖𝑡
𝑖 Initial mask for point 𝑖.  
 𝑀 𝑡𝑖𝑚𝑒
𝑖 Time constraint mask for point 𝑖.  
 𝑀 𝑒𝑛𝑒𝑟𝑔𝑦
𝑖 Energy constraint mask for point 𝑖.  
 𝑀0 1, if UAV forced return to UAV Fixed Nest Station.  
 𝑓nest State transfer rules for UAV returns to UAV Fixed Nest Station.  
 𝑓inspect State transfer rules during inspections.  
 𝛥𝑡𝑟𝑒𝑡𝑢𝑟𝑛 Time of UAV returns to UAV Fixed Nest Station from location 𝑝⌢𝑡 +1.  
 𝛥𝑡𝑚𝑜𝑣𝑒 Time of UAV from 𝑝⌢𝑡 to move to 𝑝⌢𝑡 +1.  
 𝐸𝑡𝑜𝑡𝑎𝑙
𝑖 Energy consumption of node 𝑖, where 𝐸𝑡𝑜𝑡𝑎𝑙
𝑖 = 𝛥𝑡𝑚𝑜𝑣𝑒 + 𝑇 ( 𝜏𝑎⌢𝑡
) + 𝛥𝑡𝑟𝑒𝑡𝑢𝑟𝑛.  
 𝑇 ( 𝜏𝑎⌢𝑡
) Detection time required for the node corresponding to action 𝑎⌢𝑡 .  
 𝑋𝐹 Model input features.  
 𝐵 Batch size.  
 𝐶 Number of input channels.  
 𝐿 Length of sequence.  
 𝑝𝑖 Selection probability of node 𝑖.  
 𝐸𝑠 Static coding.  
 𝐸𝑑 Dynamic coding.  
 𝐸 Fusion coding.  
 𝐹 Feature splicing results.  
 ̄𝐹 Global average pooling results.  
 𝑉𝜙(𝑡) Results of value projections at 𝑡th day.  
 ℎ𝑑𝑒𝑐 Hidden state of the decoder, initial decoding state is ℎ0.  
 𝐷𝑡𝑜𝑡𝑎𝑙−𝑑𝑖𝑠 tan 𝑐𝑒 Total path length.  
 𝜉 Unit penalty of distance.  
 𝑅𝑔𝑙𝑜𝑏𝑎𝑙 Global reward.  
 𝑛 Total number of nodes.  
 𝑝𝑔𝑙𝑜𝑏𝑎𝑙 Reward for node unit completing inspections.  
 𝑅𝑒𝑓 𝑓 Redundant flight efficiency penalties.  
 (continued on next page)
Engineering Applications of Artiϧcial Intelligence 179 (2026) 115219 
13 

===== PAGE 14 =====
Y. Sun et al.
Table A.6 (continued).
 𝑓 𝑡
𝑚 Redundant flights for on 𝑡th day, 𝑚th flight.  
 𝑝1−𝑒𝑓 𝑓 Unit penalty for single redundant flight in a single day.  
 𝑝2−𝑒𝑓 𝑓 Unit penalty for fluctuation in the volume of tasks.  
 𝑓𝑠𝑡𝑑 Standard deviation of mission volume fluctuations.  
 𝑅ℎ𝑎𝑟𝑑 Hard penalty.  
 𝑝1−ℎ𝑎𝑟𝑑 Unit penalty for not inspecting transmission towers in week one. 
 𝑓1−ℎ𝑎𝑟𝑑 Number of transmission towers not inspected in the first week.  
 𝑅𝑏𝑎𝑠𝑒 Base inspection reward.  
 𝑤𝑖 Base inspection reward of node 𝑖.  
 𝑛𝑐 Total number of inspection nodes.  
 𝑅𝑏𝑎𝑠𝑒𝑡
Total base reward earned on 𝑡th day.  
 𝑅ℎ𝑎𝑟𝑑 𝑡
Total hard penalties earned on 𝑡th day.  
 𝑅𝑒𝑓 𝑓𝑡
Total efficiency penalty obtained on 𝑡th day.  
 𝐺𝑡 Discount rewards on 𝑡th day.  
 𝑟𝑡+𝑘 Rewards earned by agent on day t + k.  
 𝐴𝑡 Advantage value on 𝑡th day.  
 ̄𝐴𝑡 Mean value of advantage values.  
 ̃𝐴𝑡 Advantage value after standardization on 𝑡th day.  
 𝜌 Constant power rate.  
 𝜗 A very small constant, where 𝜗 = 10 −8  
 𝜎𝐴𝑡
Variance of advantage values.  
 actor Loss of DPTARL-Actor.  
 critic Loss of DPTARL-Critic.  
 total Total loss of training.  
 𝑥𝑡𝑟
𝑖𝑗 1, if UAV flies from 𝑖 to 𝑗 on the on 𝑡th day, the 𝑟th round.  
 𝑦𝑡
𝑖 1, if node 𝑖 is inspected on 𝑡th day.  
Fig. D.9. Flight trajectories of the 100-node network over the 28-day horizon.
framework. However, because of the high frequency of repeated visits 
over the long-horizon schedule, the raw trajectory lines inevitably show 
substantial visual overlap, which makes the overall periodic scheduling 
pattern difficult to interpret.
To provide a clearer and more intuitive illustration of the global 
completion of heterogeneous inspection tasks, we further introduce a 
continuous spatial coverage heatmap, as shown in Fig.  D.10. Instead of 
displaying dense and overlapping trajectories, this macroscopic view 
aggregates the cumulative inspection frequencies of all nodes over the 
28-day period.
In Fig.  D.10, the color gradient from blue to red reflects the spatial 
intensity of UAV visits. High-frequency targets, such as the central
Engineering Applications of Artiϧcial Intelligence 179 (2026) 115219 
14 

===== PAGE 15 =====
Y. Sun et al.
Fig. D.10. Inspection heatmap of the 100-node network over the 28-day horizon.
substation requiring 28 visits, are clearly represented as high-density 
hot zones. In contrast, the surrounding transmission and distribution 
nodes exhibit correspondingly lower visitation densities. Taken to-
gether, the trajectory plot and the heatmap show that the proposed 
DPTARL framework can effectively manage the underlying spatiotem-
poral coupling and satisfy all heterogeneous inspection frequency re-
quirements throughout the scheduling horizon.
Data availability
Data will be made available on request.
References
Bai, X., Fielbaum, A., Kronmüller, M., Knoedler, L., Alonso-Mora, J., 2023. Group-based 
distributed auction algorithms for multi-robot task assignment. IEEE Trans. Autom. 
Sci. Eng. 20 (2), 1292–1303. http://dx.doi.org/10.1109/TASE.2022.3175040.
Betalo, M.L., Leng, S., Abishu, H.N., Dharejo, F.A., Seid, A.M., Erbad, A., Naqvi, R.A., 
Zhou, L., Guizani, M., 2024. Multi-agent deep reinforcement learning-based task 
scheduling and resource sharing for O-RAN-empowered multi-UAV-assisted wireless 
sensor networks. IEEE Trans. Veh. Technol. 73 (7), 9247–9261. http://dx.doi.org/
10.1109/TVT.2023.3330661.
Betalo, M.L., Leng, S., Seid, A.M., Abishu, H.N., Erbad, A., Bai, X., 2025. Dynamic 
charging and path planning for UAV-powered rechargeable WSNs using multi-
agent deep reinforcement learning. IEEE Trans. Autom. Sci. Eng. 22, 15610–15626. 
http://dx.doi.org/10.1109/TASE.2025.3558945.
Caballero, A., Paneque, J.L., Martinez-de Dios, J.R., Maza, I., Ollero, A., 2024. 
Multi-UAV systems for inspection of industrial and public infrastructures. In: 
Infrastructure Robotics: Methodologies, Robotic Systems and Applications. pp. 
285–303. http://dx.doi.org/10.1002/9781394162871.ch14.
Cacace, J., Orozco-Soto, S.M., Suarez, A., Caballero, A., Orsag, M., Bogdan, S., Vasilje-
vic, G., Ebeid, E., Rodriguez, J.A.A., Ollero, A., 2021. Safe local aerial manipulation 
for the installation of devices on power lines: AERIAL-CORE first year results and 
designs. Appl. Sci. 11 (13), 6220. http://dx.doi.org/10.3390/app11136220.
Cheng, C., Adulyasak, Y., Rousseau, L.-M., 2020. Drone routing with energy function: 
Formulation and exact algorithm. Transp. Res. B 139, 364–387. http://dx.doi.org/
10.1016/j.trb.2020.06.011.
Cheng, Y., Zhang, W., Zhang, Z., Zhang, C., Wang, S., Mao, S., 2025. Toward 
federated large language models: Motivations, methods, and future directions. IEEE 
Commun. Surv. Tutorials 27 (4), 2733–2764. http://dx.doi.org/10.1109/COMST.
2024.3503680.
Gao, F., 2025. A novel unmanned aerial vehicles task allocation approach based on the 
intuitionistic fuzzy multi-criteria bilateral matching-based decision-making method. 
Eng. Appl. Artif. Intell. 162, 112669. http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.engappai.2025.
112669.
Gazzea, M., Pacevicius, M., Dammann, D.O., Sapronova, A., Lunde, T.M., Arghandeh, R., 
2022. Automated power lines vegetation monitoring using high-resolution satellite 
imagery. IEEE Trans. Power Deliv. 37 (1), 308–316. http://dx.doi.org/10.1109/
TPWRD.2021.3059307.
Goarin, M., Loianno, G., 2024. Graph neural network for decentralized multi-robot 
goal assignment. IEEE Robot. Autom. Lett. 9 (5), 4051–4058. http://dx.doi.org/10.
1109/LRA.2024.3371254.
Huang, C., Zhou, X., Ran, X., Wang, J., Chen, H., Deng, W., 2023. Adaptive cylinder 
vector particle swarm optimization with differential evolution for UAV path plan-
ning. Eng. Appl. Artif. Intell. 121, 105942. http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.engappai.
2023.105942.
Javaid, S., Fahim, H., He, B., Saeed, N., 2024. Large language models for UAVs: Current 
state and pathways to the future. IEEE Open J. Veh. Technol. 5, 1166–1192. 
http://dx.doi.org/10.1109/OJVT.2024.3446799.
Li, L., Sang, H., Zhang, D., 2026. An integrated task and path planning approach 
for intelligent coordination of agricultural robots. Expert Syst. Appl. 302, 130602. 
http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.eswa.2025.130602.
Li, Z., Shi, N., Zhao, L., Zhang, M., 2024. Deep reinforcement learning path planning 
and task allocation for multi-robot collaboration. Alex. Eng. J. 109, 408–423. 
http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.aej.2024.08.102.
Liu, Z., Cao, Y., Chen, J., Li, J., 2023. A hierarchical reinforcement learning algorithm 
based on attention mechanism for UAV autonomous navigation. IEEE Trans. 
Intell. Transp. Syst. 24 (11), 13309–13320. http://dx.doi.org/10.1109/TITS.2022.
3225721.
Liu, Y., Shi, J., Liu, Z., Huang, J., Zhou, T., 2019. Two-layer routing for high-voltage 
powerline inspection by cooperated ground vehicle and drone. Energies 12 (7), 
1385. http://dx.doi.org/10.3390/en12071385.
Liu, P., Wang, B., Liu, W., Zhang, L., 2021. Multi-task allocation of multi-UAV coalition 
based on improved quantum genetic algorithm. In: 2021 40th Chinese Control 
Conference. CCC, Shanghai, China, pp. 1802–1807. http://dx.doi.org/10.23919/
CCC52363.2021.9550641.
Luo, X., Wang, Q., Gong, H., Tang, C., 2024. UAV path planning based on the average 
TD3 algorithm with prioritized experience replay. IEEE Access 12, 38017–38029. 
http://dx.doi.org/10.1109/ACCESS.2024.3375083.
Mao, X., Wu, G., Fan, M., Cao, Z., Pedrycz, W., 2025. DL-DRL: A double-level deep 
reinforcement learning approach for large-scale task scheduling of multi-UAV. IEEE 
Trans. Autom. Sci. Eng. 22, 1028–1044. http://dx.doi.org/10.1109/TASE.2024.
3358894.
Mbuli, N., Mendu, B., Seitshiro, M., Pretorius, J.-H.C., 2020. What outage attributes 
affect the frequencies of forced transformer outages in eskom regions? Evidence 
from 2007–2016 data. Energy Rep. 6, 474–482. http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.egyr.
2020.11.211.
Engineering Applications of Artiϧcial Intelligence 179 (2026) 115219 
15 

===== PAGE 16 =====
Y. Sun et al.
Mirza, I.S., Shah, S., Siddiqi, M.Z., Wuttisittikukij, L., Sasithong, P., 2023. Task assign-
ment and path planning of multiple unmanned aerial vehicles using integer linear 
programming. In: TENCON 2023 - 2023 IEEE Region 10 Conference. TENCON, 
Chiang Mai, Thailand, pp. 547–551. http://dx.doi.org/10.1109/TENCON58879.
2023.10322503.
Na, Y., Li, Y., Chen, D., Yao, Y., Li, T., Liu, H., Wang, K., 2023. Optimal energy 
consumption path planning for unmanned aerial vehicles based on improved 
particle swarm optimization. Sustainability 15 (16), 12101. http://dx.doi.org/10.
3390/su151612101.
Shahbazian, R., Pugliese, L.D., Guerriero, F., Macrina, G., 2024. Integrating machine 
learning into vehicle routing problem: Methods and applications. IEEE Access 12, 
93087–93115. http://dx.doi.org/10.1109/ACCESS.2024.3422479.
Shi, J., Zhou, S., Man, X., Li, C., Guo, F., 2026. Trajectory planning and tracking for 
UAVs with deep reinforcement learning and adaptive nonlinear MPC. Expert Syst. 
Appl. 303, 130649. http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.eswa.2025.130649.
Tedeschi, P., Oligeri, G., Di Pietro, R., 2020. Leveraging jamming to help drones 
complete their mission. IEEE Access 8, 5049–5064. http://dx.doi.org/10.1109/
ACCESS.2019.2963105.
Wang, Z., Ng, S.X., El-Hajjar, M., 2025. A 3D spatial information compression 
based deep reinforcement learning technique for UAV path planning in cluttered 
environments. IEEE Open J. Veh. Technol. 6, http://dx.doi.org/10.1109/OJVT.
2025.3540174.
Wang, L., Wang, K., Pan, C., Xu, W., Aslam, N., Nallanathan, A., 2022. Deep 
reinforcement learning based dynamic trajectory control for UAV-assisted mobile 
edge computing. IEEE Trans. Mob. Comput. 21 (10), 3536–3550. http://dx.doi.org/
10.1109/TMC.2021.3059691.
Wu, W., Zhang, L., Le, J., Lu, Z., 2025. Integrated method for multi-UAV task 
assignment and trajectory planning with deadlock based on Three-dimensional 
Dubins path. Sci. Rep. 15, 24152. http://dx.doi.org/10.1038/s41598-025-09753-x.
Zhang, D., Xuan, Z., Zhang, Y., Yao, J., Li, X., Li, X., 2023. Path planning of unmanned 
aerial vehicle in complex environments based on state-detection twin delayed deep 
deterministic policy gradient. Machines 11 (1), 108. http://dx.doi.org/10.3390/
machines11010108.
Zhang, W., Zhang, S., Wu, F., Wang, Y., 2021. Path planning of UAV based on 
improved adaptive grey wolf optimization algorithm. IEEE Access 9, 89400–89411. 
http://dx.doi.org/10.1109/ACCESS.2021.3090776.
Zhao, G., Wang, Y., Mu, T., Meng, Z., Wang, Z., 2024. Reinforcement learning assisted 
multi-UAV task allocation and path planning for IIoT. IEEE Internet Things J. 11 
(16), 26766–26777. http://dx.doi.org/10.1109/JIOT.2024.3370152.
Zheng, D., Zhang, Y.-f., Li, F., Cheng, P., 2023. UAVs cooperative task assignment and 
trajectory optimization with safety and time constraints. Def. Technol. 20, 149–161. 
http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.dt.2022.01.011.
Zhou, H., Long, Y., Gong, S., Zhu, K., Hoang, D.T., Niyato, D., 2023. Hierarchical 
multi-agent deep reinforcement learning for energy-efficient hybrid computation 
offloading. IEEE Trans. Veh. Technol. 72 (1), 986–1001. http://dx.doi.org/10.1109/
TVT.2022.3202525.
Engineering Applications of Artiϧcial Intelligence 179 (2026) 115219 
16 