

===== PAGE 1 =====
Contents lists available at ScienceDirect
Engineering Applications of Artificial Intelligence
journal homepage: www.elsevier.com/locate/engappai
Research Paper
A reliable traversability learning method based on human-demonstrated risk
cost mapping for mobile robots over uneven terrain
Bo Zhang a,b,c, Guobin Lia,b, Jiale Zhanga,b, Xiaoshan Baia,b,∗
a The College of Mechatronics and Control Engineering, Shenzhen University, Shenzhen, 518060, China
b The Shenzhen City Joint Laboratory of Autonomous Unmanned Systems and Intelligent Manipulation, Shenzhen, 518060, China
c Guangdong Laboratory of Artificial Intelligence and Digital Economy (SZ), Shenzhen, 518107, China
A R T I C L E I N F O
Keywords:
Autonomous navigation
Inverse reinforcement learning
Feature mapping
Uneven terrain
A B S T R A C T
The paper proposed a traversability learning method based on the human demonstration for generating
risk cost maps. These maps aid mobile robots in identifying safe areas for reliable autonomous navigation
over uneven terrain. Firstly, a maximum causal entropy-based inverse reinforcement learning method is
employed to generate a reward function by considering human-demonstrated trajectories, robot poses, and
feature vectors extracted from elevation data. This reward function is intended to accurately capture the
behavioral preferences identified in human-demonstrated trajectories, specifically focusing on low-risk areas of
the environment. Secondly, the reward function is combined with terrain feature data to generate a cost map
and least-cost trajectory. Utilizing a wheeled mobile robot traversing uneven terrain, this paper verifies the
adaptability enhancement of the proposed method for autonomous navigation over outdoor uneven terrain.
The experimental results show an increase of 4%–10% in the success rate, a decrease of 13.6%–32.1% in
the cumulative slope and gradient, and a decrease of 20.8%–27.4% in the Hausdorff distance of the robot’s
trajectories compared with traditional inverse reinforcement learning-based navigation methods.
1. Introduction
Autonomous mobile robots are increasingly being utilized in out-
door scenarios to assist or replace humans in various tasks, such as
package delivery, Mars exploration, and mine search ( Chen et al. ,
2021; Rankin et al. , 2021). To operate in such environments, mobile
robots have to deal with intricate and uneven terrain, including various
obstacles difficulty to identify, and uneven and bumpy ground ( Shah
and Levine , 2022). However, ensuring a robot’s autonomous naviga-
tion reliability in such complex environments remains challenging.
To overcome such challenges, it is necessary to develop the robot’s
ability to autonomously identify safe and feasible areas in challenging
environments and to safely plan a reliable path to the target point in
uneven terrain (Siva et al., 2019).
Reinforcement learning (RL) is a promising approach to improve
the adaptability of mobile robots in complex environments ( Guastella
and Muscato, 2021; Weerakoon et al., 2022; Zhang et al., 2022, 2018).
In Guastella and Muscato (2021), the authors review the learning-based
methods, such as RL, employed to solve the problem of environmental
perception and interpretation with the ultimate goal of autonomous
navigation of ground vehicles in unstructured environments. By utiliz-
ing elevation maps of the environment and the robot pose and goal
∗ Corresponding author at: The College of Mechatronics and Control Engineering, Shenzhen University, Shenzhen, 518060, China.
E-mail address: baixiaoshan@szu.edu.cn (X. Bai).
as input, a fully trained deep reinforcement learning (DRL) network
is used to generate an environment attention mask that identifies the
reduced stability of regions and evaluates the risk level of the terrain
in a given area ( Weerakoon et al. , 2022). Q-Learning, combined with
the improved A* algorithm, is used for online planning of a safe path
on uneven terrain ( Zhang et al. , 2022 ). In Zhang et al. ( 2018), a
deep reinforcement learning network is used to precisely control the
movement of a robot over a rough terrain by using a depth image as
an input. It is important to acknowledge that the efficiency of these
RL and planning algorithms is significantly affected by the reward
function. Numerous existing traditional navigation frameworks rely
on the manual setting of environmental reward functions based on
personal experience, without taking into account the optimality of
these reward values. In challenging and uncertain terrains, such as
hilly wooded landscapes, the diverse and extensive presence of surface
features will result in the necessity to continuously adjust the reward
function settings, rather than completing it in a single attempt. Indeed,
in extremely challenging situations, the process of determining an ap-
propriate reward function will encounter struggles, potentially leading
to a deteriorated performance for autonomous navigation ( Nair et al.,
2018).
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.engappai.2024.109339
Received 31 October 2023; Received in revised form 29 June 2024; Accepted 12 September 2024
Engineering Applications of Artiϧcial Intelligence 138 (2024) 109339 
Available online 27 September 2024 
0952-1976/© 2024 Elsevier Ltd. All rights are reserved, including those for text and data mining, AI training, and similar technologies. 

===== PAGE 2 =====
B. Zhang et al.
Fig. 1. The training process of reward function. Proposed method recovers the cost function that characterizes the environmental risk based on the preference characteristics of
the human demonstration for different terrain features and then plans a reliable path to reach the target. Scenario A is shown as figure (a), which includes a slope with a steep
front slope and a gentler side slope. Figure (b) shows the DEM corresponding to Scenario A and the 20 human-demonstrated trajectories. These trajectories imply the preference
features for low-risk areas of the environment. The environmental cost function and the planned trajectories is shown as figure (c), intercepted by rviz.
Human perceptual abilities and behavior exhibit good adaptability
to complex environments. To learn this human environmental adapt-
ability, the human–robot collaborative technology ( Chen et al. , 2020)
combined with a learning-from-demonstration (LFD) approach is con-
sidered to allow robots to learn from humans to traverse uneven
terrain. To improve the adaptability of driverless vehicles in urban
environments, LFD has been used to train a wide range of reward func-
tions (Wulfmeier et al., 2017) or to learn driving strategies (You et al.,
2019). In Kim and Pineau ( 2016), dynamic path planning efficiency
in social environments is improved by combining LFD with specific
environmental feature extraction strategies. For autonomous mobile
robots operating in uneven outdoor environments, LFD facilitates the
rapid adaptation of robots to new and complicated environments, as
well as the acquisition of specific behaviors, such as following road
edges (Wigness et al., 2018). However, these studies do not account for
variations in terrain height or potential risky areas, nor do they involve
extracting and mapping terrain features. If the number of trajectories
demonstrated by human is insufficient, the learning results of these
methods are often suboptimal due to infrequent access to significant
features of uneven terrain.
In this paper, a traversability learning method based on human
demonstration is proposed for developing risk cost maps to assist
mobile robots in identifying safe areas. Initially, the proposed method
utilizes the digital elevation model (DEM) to extract the geometric fea-
tures of the environment. Subsequently, inverse reinforcement learning
(IRL) is utilized to acquire the reward function by learning from hu-
man demonstrations, simultaneously constructing a risk cost map that
depicts the risk information in different areas. Ultimately, considering
the environmental risk information, trajectory planning is performed
to enable the robot to avoid high-risk areas for reliable autonomous
navigation. The advantage of the proposed method lies in its ability to
generate a risk cost map of the uneven terrain through LFD. This makes
the proposed method particularly suitable for autonomous navigation
tasks in challenging terrains where directly specifying environmental
reward functions is difficult. The main contributions of our research
include the following.
• To address the problem of inadequate and poorly generalizable
learning results resulting from a restricted amount of human
demonstrations, the terrain is mapped as states using geometric
features.
• To tackle the difficulty of determining the reward function in
complicated terrain, a maximum causal entropy (MCE) IRL is
employed to learn the reward function. This function captures
the human preference characteristics of low-risk areas of the
environment.
• To improve the reliability of path planning, the methodology for
generating the cost map and cost function considers both the
robot kinematics and risk information.
2. Related work
This section provides a review of existing research in the following
three areas: learning from demonstration, extracting terrain features
and navigation in uneven terrain.
2.1. Learning from demonstration
LFD is a methodology allowing robots to learn knowledge by analyz-
ing data obtained through human demonstrations. This data involves
the human’s assessment of possible risks and their preferences about
environmental features. The learning results are usually manifested in
the reward function. The LFD methodology eliminates the requirement
Engineering Applications of Artiϧcial Intelligence 138 (2024) 109339 
2 

===== PAGE 3 =====
B. Zhang et al.
for engineers to manually specify reward functions, which is a nec-
essary step in traditional methods. The reward functions acquired by
LFD exhibit a higher degree of alignment with the optimal criteria
defined by human experts (Wigness et al., 2018). LFD research in
autonomous navigation for mobile robots is inadequate in spite of
various LFD-based approaches. These methods involve acquiring the
reward function through imitation learning, as described in Argall
et al. (2009). The demonstrated data in the method come from either
trajectories categorized by humans on satellite maps (Silver et al.,
2008) or trajectories gathered through remote operator control of
mobile robots (Suger et al., 2015). Furthermore, the integration of
IRL with various path planning algorithms, such as Rapidly Explor-
ing Random Trees, has been employed to facilitate the acquisition of
navigation behavior for robots (Pérez-Higueras et al., 2018). Regarding
unstructured environments, this research in Siva et al. (2022) compares
several IRL approaches to determine the most desirable trajectory.
By learning the numerous demonstrations of human driving behavior,
deep neural networks (DNNs) have motivated the utilization of deep
IRL with convolutional neural networks (Wulfmeier et al., 2016) and
highly parallel model predictive control (Triest et al., 2023) to obtain
reward functions. However, these IRL methods using DNNs require
considerable demonstration data to determine reward functions. The
utilization of an approach that develops the reward function through
a limited quantity of demonstration data exhibits significant poten-
tial. Recent research has demonstrated the effectiveness of maximum
entropy IRL in mitigating the matching ambiguity, illustrated in Xie
et al. (2020). An MCE framework expands on the maximum entropy
framework in statistical modeling by incorporating Markov decision
processes (MDPs) with stochastic transitions (Ziebart et al., 2013).
This research utilizes the MCE IRL technique for obtaining the reward
function from human demonstrations.
2.2. Extracting terrain features
Accurately identifying terrain features is critical to improve learning
efficiency and generalizability. In the initial stages of the investiga-
tion, scholars relied on topographic mapping methods (Konolige et al.,
2009) and commonly utilized LiDAR or cameras to reconstruct the
three-dimensional environment (Shan et al., 2020). These techniques
facilitated the acquisition of point clouds or image data, which were
subsequently employed for terrain classification (Wurm et al., 2009).
The utilization of DNNs has gained prominence in the field of ter-
rain categorization, particularly in the incorporation of visual input
through neural networks (Sathyamoorthy et al., 2022). A method for
semantic terrain segmentation was presented in a recent work by Guan
et al. (2023) that utilized both RGB pictures and 3D point clouds.
Furthermore, several methods utilized data on robot–ground inter-
action in real-time for DNNs training, as mentioned by Siva et al.
(2021). Nevertheless, most of the visual features extracted by DNNs
from robot–environment interaction data can considerably distinguish
between environments. Moreover, the enormous amount of 3D point
cloud data means that extracting environmental features directly from
the data is insufficient to meet real-time navigation requirements. The
critical role of DEM for efficient outdoor navigation tasks by robots has
been highlighted in recent studies (Guastella and Muscato, 2021). In
our paper, the environmental DEM obtained from the 3D point cloud
data (Fankhauser et al., 2018) is merged with the developed feature
mapping approach, presented in Section 4.1, to enhance the efficiency
of environmental feature extraction. To overcome the challenges of
DEM in modeling overlapping structures, the proposed algorithm filters
out the point clouds that exceed the robot’s current maximum height,
and maintains the point clouds that impact the robot’s navigation pro-
cess. This excludes the necessity for investigating intricate overlapping
structures. By employing DEM, the proposed method is now limited to
solely taking into account the elevation data of the terrain. The trade-
off for this approach is the inevitable restriction in the recognizability
of the ground materials.
Table 1
Symbols and their meanings used in the formulas.
Symbol Definitions
𝐄𝐭 DEM data acquired at time t
𝛾 Slope characteristic quantity of a cell
𝜔 Uneven characteristic quantity of a cell
𝑠𝑡 Robot’s state at time t
𝑎𝑡 Robot’s action at time t
𝜋 Policy function
𝜁 Trajectory containing state–action pairs
𝜙 Feature vectors mapped by trajectory or state
𝑅 Reward function learned from MCE IRL
𝜃 Reward function parameters
𝐂𝐭 Cost map for path planning at time t
2.3. Autonomous navigation on uneven terrain
The safety of path planning algorithms is a crucial consideration in
the framework of autonomous navigation for mobile robots performing
on uneven terrain. Early research on autonomous navigation in uneven
terrain involved robot–terrain interactions (Howard and Kelly, 2007),
occupancy maps (Merhy et al., 2008), continuous obstacle spaces (Piv-
toraiko et al., 2009), and uneven terrain fields (Shimoda et al., 2005).
High-dimensional data can now be handled in the motion planner
thanks to the advancement of DRL. For example, in Zhang et al. (2018),
the sensor data onboard was applied to train DNNs to directly output
the robot motion control command. In other approaches, perceptual
inputs such as robot poses and images introduced additional reward
constructs and self-supervised modules are applied to train the neural
network (Josef and Degani, 2020), or a navigation method that learns
from experience is used to allow the robot to pass through areas
that were originally judged to be impassable (Kahn et al., 2021).
However, most of these DRL methods are based on artificially awarded
environmental reward functions. Therefore, in the environment of a
robot traversing challenging and uneven terrain with various features,
it becomes necessary to adjust the environmental reward function
in order to ensure the continuing effectiveness of the algorithm. In
the proposed method, the environmental reward function is acquired
through IRL using human tutorials. In order to ensure that the learned
autonomous navigation can be applied to a variety of difficult terrain
scenarios, this method is combined with a path planning algorithm.
3. Notations and problem formulation
3.1. Notations
Table 1 lists the notations and their meanings that are used in
our formulation. The robot’s location is set as the origin of the world
coordinate system at program startup, and the position of the grid in
the map relative to the world coordinate origin is represented by the
coordinates (𝑖, 𝑗). The symbol 𝑡 denotes the temporal information of
the variable or matrix. The DEM 𝐄𝐭 and the cost map 𝐂𝐭 are both
represented as two-dimensional matrices in this paper. The values in
the matrices represent elevation values or risk cost values at corre-
sponding positions. The size of all matrix data structures in our method
are 200 × 200, representing a realistic environment of 20 × 20 m with
a resolution of 0.1 m. This resolution accurately reflects the impact of
the terrain on the robot’s movement safety while avoiding excessive
computational burden. Additionally, the abbreviations used in this
paper and their corresponding full names are listed in Table 2.
3.2. Problem formulation
In this paper, to address the challenge in traditional autonomous
navigation frameworks of manually specifying environment cost maps
in complex and uneven terrains, an LFD-based method for constructing
Engineering Applications of Artiϧcial Intelligence 138 (2024) 109339 
3 

===== PAGE 4 =====
B. Zhang et al.
Table 2
Abbreviations used in this paper.
RL Reinforcement learning
DRL Deep reinforcement learning
IRL Inverse reinforcement learning
MCE Maximum causal entropy
DNNs Deep neural networks
LFD Learning from demonstration
DEM Digital elevation model
MDPs Markov decision processes
MPL motion primitive library
IOC Inverse optimal control
TL Trajectory length
CSR Cumulative slope and roughness
SR Success rate
PT Planning time
MHD Modified Hausdorff distance
risk cost maps is adopted, which can be divided into two stages: learn-
ing the reward function from human-demonstrated trajectories and
calculating the cost map based on this reward function for least-cost
trajectory planning. Additionally, a basic assumption is that the policy
implied in the human-demonstrated trajectory 𝜁𝐸 is the optimal policy
𝜋𝐸. To exploit this potentially optimal policy function, an IRL module is
trained. This module requires in human-demonstrated trajectories and
information about the current environment as input, and determines a
reward function for the current environment:
𝑅𝜃(𝑠𝑡) = 𝜃 ⋅ 𝜙(𝑠𝑡), (1)
where the subscript 𝜃 indicates the dependence of the reward function
𝑅 on the parameter 𝜃, 𝜙(𝑠𝑡) is the feature vector corresponding to
state 𝑠𝑡, and 𝑠𝑡 contains topographic information about the current
environment.
Next, a cost map 𝐂𝐭 is constructed based on the reward function
recovered from the demonstrated trajectories. The value of each cell
index (𝑖, 𝑗) in the cost map 𝐂𝐭 (𝑖, 𝑗) can directly characterize the risk level
of the corresponding terrain. The cost map 𝐂𝐭 guides the navigation
component to plan a least-cost trajectory to reach the goal point (see
Section 4.3). The least-cost trajectory satisfies the following criteria:
min
∑
(𝑖,𝑗)∈𝜁
𝐂𝐭 (𝑖, 𝑗), (2)
where (𝑖, 𝑗) represents the terrain cells traversed by the trajectory 𝜁.
3.3. Inverse reinforcement learning
IRL is based on the MDPs, which comprise four components(𝑆, 𝐴, 𝑇 ,
𝑅): 𝑆 is the set of states, 𝐴 is the set of actions, 𝑇 is the state–
action transition model, and 𝑅 is the reward function. In MDPs, the
interaction between the robot and the environment involves the robot’s
observation of the state 𝑠 of the environment, selecting an action 𝑎
based on the current policy 𝜋, executing the action, receiving the
current reward 𝑟 as feedback, and using this reward 𝑟 to guide the
improvement of the policy 𝜋 so that the robot can achieve higher
rewards. It is worth noting that in MDPs of IRL, the reward function
𝑅 is learned from human demonstrations 𝐷 (See Fig. 2). In this paper,
IRL is employed to learn the environmental reward function 𝑅 from
human demonstration trajectories 𝐷 = { 𝜁𝑖}𝑛
𝑖=1 on uneven outdoor
terrain, where each trajectory 𝜁 encompasses a sequence of states
and actions. By integrating methods for constructing cost maps and
planning paths, the robot is guided to perform tasks designed to imitate
human behaviors.
4. LFD based traversability learning method
This section introduces the three main components of the proposed
method: extracting and mapping environmental features using terrain
geometry, building reward functions from human demonstrations using
MCE IRL, and generating a least-cost trajectory using cost maps (refer
to Fig. 3).
4.1. Environmental geometric feature extraction and mapping
To improve the computational efficiency of IRL optimization and
obtain a generalizable reward function with topographic information,
DEM data are used to compute the geometric features of each cell
for state mapping. Unlike the traditional method, which maps only
feature vectors to coordinates (𝑥, 𝑦), slope and roughness are computed
to characterize the cell state.
The slope 𝛾 of a cell is calculated by plane fitting. Let 𝑈𝑖 be a square
region of size 𝑁 ×𝑁 sampled from the DEM, which contains 𝑁 2 points,
denoted as (𝑥𝑖,𝑗 , 𝑦𝑖,𝑗 , 𝑧𝑖,𝑗 ), 𝑖, 𝑗 ∈ 𝑈𝑖. Plane fitting is applied to 𝑁 2 points
within region 𝑈𝑖, resulting in the 3D plane 𝐴𝑥𝑖,𝑗 +𝐵𝑦𝑖,𝑗 +𝐶 = 𝑧𝑖,𝑗, where
𝐴, 𝐵, 𝐶 are the coefficients of the 3D plane. The center point 𝛾 of the
region 𝑈𝑖 is then calculated using the following equation:
𝛾 = 𝜋
2 − sin−1 1
√
𝐴2 + 𝐵2 + 1
. (3)
The abrupt changes in the ground elevation values are denoted by
roughness 𝜔 and calculated as follows:
𝜔 = 𝑑−1
√
1
𝑁 2
∑
𝑖,𝑗∈𝑈𝑖
(𝑧𝑖,𝑗 − ̄ 𝑧)2, (4)
where 𝑑 is the wheel diameter of the mobile robot, and ̄ 𝑧is the average
height of 𝑁 2 cells within 𝑈𝑖.
Each cell state is represented as𝑠 = [𝛾, 𝜔]𝑇 instead of the coordinates
(𝑥, 𝑦). To enable the states to participate in the computation, each state𝑠
must be mapped into a feature vector 𝜙(𝑠). This is achieved by dividing
each geometric feature into 𝑘 discrete intervals ranging from 0, 1
𝑘 to
𝑘−1
𝑘 , resulting in a total of𝑘2 possible cell state combinations. Each state
corresponds to an independent unit vector 𝜙(𝑠) ∈ R𝑘2
. The proposed
feature extraction method decreases the number of computations and
demonstration trajectories required for the subsequent IRL optimization
process. In addition, this feature mapping method can be adapted to
different environments by adjusting the 𝑘 value, which is more efficient
for computing.
4.2. Learning reward functions from demonstrations
The function of the IRL module is to explain human behaviors and
build the underlying reward function. The feature extraction and map-
ping approach mentioned in the previous Section 4.1 greatly reduces
the number of required demonstration trajectories and maps uneven
terrain into an MDP with stochastic transition dynamics. Therefore, an
IRL method based on the MCE principle (Ziebart et al., 2013) is chosen,
which has advantages over other IRL methods because the ambiguity of
the decision to find the reward function is eliminated by the maximum
entropy principle. MCE IRL is suitable for MDPs with few trajectories
and random state transitions.
As input to the MCE IRL component is a set of human demon-
strations 𝐷 = { 𝜁𝑖}𝑛
𝑖=1 comprising 𝑛 human-demonstrated trajectories.
Each trajectory 𝜁 = [( 𝑠1, 𝑎1), (𝑠2, 𝑎2), … , (𝑠𝑇 −1, 𝑎𝑇 −1), (𝑠𝑇 , 𝑎𝑇 )] contains
sequences of action variables 𝐚1∶𝑇 and sequences of state variables 𝐬1∶𝑇 .
In the causal entropy method, the action𝑎𝑡 selected by the robot at time
𝑡 depends not only on the current state𝑠𝑡 but also on the past state𝐬1∶𝑡−1
and the past action 𝐚1∶𝑡−1. Therefore, the probability of performing
action 𝑎𝑡 can be expressed as 𝑃 (𝑎𝑡|𝐬1∶𝑡, 𝐚1∶𝑡−1). Similarly, the state 𝑠𝑡 is
related to the past state 𝐬1∶𝑡−1 and the past action 𝐚1∶𝑡−1. The probability
of reaching the state 𝑠𝑡 can be expressed as 𝑃 (𝑠𝑡|𝐬1∶𝑡−1, 𝐚1∶𝑡−1). On the
basis of this, the causal entropy is defined as follows.
𝐻 (𝐚1∶𝑇 ∥ 𝐬1∶𝑇
)≜ E𝑃 (𝐚1∶𝑇 ,𝐬1∶𝑇 )
[− log 𝑃 (𝐚1∶𝑇 ∥ 𝐬1∶𝑇
)]
, (5)
where E is the expectation and:
⎧
⎪
⎨
⎪⎩
𝑃 (𝐚1∶𝑇 , 𝐬1∶𝑇
)= ∏𝑇
𝑡=1 𝑃 (𝑠𝑡 ∣ 𝐬1∶𝑡−1, 𝐚1∶𝑡−1
)×
𝑃 (𝐚1∶𝑇 ∥ 𝐬1∶𝑇
)
𝑃 (𝐚1∶𝑇 ∥ 𝐬1∶𝑇
)≜ ∏𝑇
𝑡=1 𝑃 (𝑎𝑡 ∣ 𝐚1∶𝑡−1, 𝐬1∶𝑡
).
(6)
Engineering Applications of Artiϧcial Intelligence 138 (2024) 109339 
4 

===== PAGE 5 =====
B. Zhang et al.
Fig. 2. MDPs in IRL.
Fig. 3. Proposed algorithmic architecture. The DEM of the current environment and
the robot’s pose obtained from sensors are used along with the human-demonstrated
trajectories as input to the MCE IRL module. The output is a reward function charac-
terizing the trajectory preference for environmental features. This reward function is
combined with the DEM to calculate a cost map, which serves as the input to the Hybrid
A* algorithm for trajectory planning. The actual execution of the planned trajectory is
performed using model predictive control (MPC).
Remark 1. The entropy 𝐻 is utilized to evaluate the distribution
𝑃 derived by optimization. If there are multiple distributions 𝑃 that
satisfy the requirements, the one with the highest entropy 𝐻 should
be selected, which means determining a solution that conforms with
the information provided to the solver with minimal deviation (Ziebart
et al., 2013).
To allow the states into the computation, the feature mapping
method described in Section 4.1 is used to transfer each state 𝐬 to a
feature vector 𝜙(𝑠). The feature vector representing the trajectory 𝜁 is
denoted as 𝜙(𝜁), and the relationship between two feature vectors is
shown as follows:
𝜙(𝜁) =
∑
(𝑠𝑖,𝑎𝑖)∈𝜁
𝜙(𝑠𝑖). (7)
MCE IRL is based on feature–expectation matching, which requires
the expected frequency of visiting features in the human demonstra-
tions to be equal to the expected frequency of features visited by the
robot based on the recovered reward function. This is expressed as
follows:
E𝜋𝐿 [𝜙(𝜁)] = E𝜋𝐸 [𝜙(𝜁)], (8)
where 𝜋𝐿 is the strategy held by the robot, which is obtained from the
restructured reward, and 𝜋𝐸 represents the potential strategy followed
by the human demonstrations and encodes the notion of environmental
rewards and optimality.
Combining (5) and (8), an optimization problem can be formulated
as follows:
argmax
{𝑃 (𝑎𝑡∣𝐬1∶𝑡,𝐚1∶𝑡−1)}
𝐻 (𝐚1∶𝑇 ∥ 𝐬1∶𝑇
),
𝑠.𝑡.
{
E𝜋𝐿 [𝜙(𝜁)] = E𝜋𝐸 [𝜙(𝜁)]
∑
∀𝐬1∶𝑡,𝐚1∶𝑡−1 𝑃 (𝑎𝑡|𝐬1∶𝑡, 𝐚1∶𝑡−1) = 1 .
(9)
By solving this optimization problem, an action probability dis-
tribution can be obtained. This distribution, denoted 𝑃 (𝑎𝑡|𝐬1∶𝑡, 𝐚1∶𝑡−1),
maximizes entropy and ensures that the expected feature visitation
frequency of the robot’s trajectory, E𝜋𝐿 [𝜙(𝜁)], matches that of the
human-demonstrated trajectory E𝜋𝐸 [𝜙(𝜁)].
To learn the reward function, it must be parameterized. Combining
(1) and ( 7), the reward of trajectory 𝜁 can be defined as a linear
combination of the feature vectors that represent the states:
𝑅𝜃(𝜁) = 𝜃𝑇 𝜙(𝜁) =
|𝜁|∑
𝑖=0
𝜃𝑇 𝜙(𝑠𝑖). (10)
where |𝜁| is the length of the trajectory 𝜁. Thus, given the trajectory
feature vector 𝜙(𝜁), the objective of solving ( 9) is to optimize weight
parameter vector 𝜃 to optimize reward 𝑅𝜃(𝜁).
To solve parameter 𝜃 from ( 9), the Lagrange multipliers method
and the gradient ascent method are used. The Lagrange multiplier
is parameter 𝜃 of the reward function, and the gradient formula of
parameter 𝜃 is obtained as:
∇𝜃𝐿(𝑃 , 𝜃) = E𝜋𝐸 [𝜙(𝜁)] −
∑
𝑠𝑡∈𝑆
𝐷𝑠𝑡 𝜙(𝑠𝑡), (11)
Engineering Applications of Artiϧcial Intelligence 138 (2024) 109339 
5 

===== PAGE 6 =====
B. Zhang et al.
Fig. 4. Cost map generation and least-cost path planning. (a) A testing environment with numerous steep slopes and elevation values between 0 and 2 m. (b) The generated cost
map in Rviz, where regions closer to red indicate higher risk. The least-cost path is planned using our cost function (pink) and compared to the standard cost function (orange)
using the Hybrid A* algorithm. Compared with the orange path, the pink path stays away from high-risk (red) areas and does not pass through medium-risk (green) areas, resulting
in a lower CSR. Therefore, the pink path can be considered to have higher reliability.
where 𝑆 is the set containing all states 𝑠 in the trajectory 𝜁, and 𝐷𝑠𝑡 is
the expected state visitation frequency and can be calculated iteratively
as follows:
𝐷𝑠𝑡+1 =
∑
𝑠𝑡∈𝑆
∑
𝑎𝑡∈𝐴
𝐷𝑠𝑡 𝜋 (𝑎𝑡 ∣ 𝑠𝑡, 𝜃)𝑃 (𝑠𝑡+1 ∣ 𝑠𝑡, 𝑎𝑡
). (12)
where 𝐴 is the set containing all actions 𝑎 in the trajectory 𝜁, and the
policy function 𝜋(𝑎𝑡|𝑠𝑡, 𝜃) can be calculated by the current optimized
parameter 𝜃 combined with the known environmental state transfer
probability 𝑃 (𝑠𝑡+1|𝑠𝑡, 𝑎𝑡):
𝜋(𝑎𝑡|𝑠𝑡, 𝜃) = exp(log 𝑍𝑠𝑡,𝑎𝑡 − log 𝑍𝑠𝑡 ), (13)
where:
⎧
⎪
⎨
⎪⎩
log 𝑍𝑠𝑡,𝑎𝑡 = 𝜃𝑇 𝜙(𝑠𝑡) + 𝜆 ∑
𝑠𝑡+1∈𝑆
𝑃 (𝑠𝑡+1|𝑠𝑡, 𝑎𝑡) log 𝑍𝑠𝑡+1
log 𝑍𝑠𝑡 = sof tmax
𝑎𝑡
log 𝑍𝑠𝑡,𝑎𝑡 ,
(14)
where 𝜆 ∈ (0, 1) is the discount factor, and sof tmax𝑥𝑓 (𝑥) ≜ log ∑
𝑥𝑓 (𝑥).
Remark 2. The parameter 𝜃 is determined through a rolling optimiza-
tion process by Eqs. ( 11)–(14). In (14), 𝜃 represents the result of the
previous optimization step, which is not optimal. The optimization pro-
cess is accomplished once the ∇𝜃𝐿(𝑃 , 𝜃) in (11) reaches a sufficiently
minimal number. By substituting the optimal value of 𝜃 into (10), the
ultimate reward function 𝑅𝜃 is obtained.
4.3. Least-cost trajectory generation
Before utilizing the planning algorithm to generate a least-cost
navigation trajectory, it is necessary to construct a cost map containing
information about the risk of the current uneven terrain. By combining
the reward function recovered from the IRL with the terrain feature
vector, the corresponding cost value is calculated as follows:
𝐂𝐭 (𝑖, 𝑗) = ( 𝛾(𝑖, 𝑗) + 𝜔(𝑖, 𝑗)) × 𝑅−1
𝜃 (𝑠𝑡). (15)
Moreover, to improve the security of robot navigation, the following
operation is performed on the cost map:
𝐂𝐭 (𝑖, 𝑗) = ∞ if 𝐂𝐭 (𝑖, 𝑗) > 𝐶 max, (16)
where 𝐶𝑚𝑎𝑥 is determined based on the generation value corresponding
to very high-risk terrain and allows the robot to avoid these high-risk
areas. In this paper, 𝐶𝑚𝑎𝑥 = 1 (See Fig. 4).
The purpose of the proposed path planning method is to validate
the effectiveness of cost maps. Therefore, in this paper, path plan-
ning method does not take into account complex situations such as
dynamic obstacles. The Hybrid A* algorithm ( Dolgov et al. , 2008) is
used to generate the least-cost navigation trajectory. The advantage
of the Hybrid A* algorithm over the A* algorithm lies in its ability
to generate trajectories that satisfy the robot’s dynamic constraints,
reducing the burden of trajectory optimization. However, the tipping
risk of the wheeled robot driving on uneven terrain is not considered
in the cumulative cost function and the heuristic cost function of the
classical Hybrid A* algorithm. Moreover, the classical cost function
penalizes the safety detours executed by the robot, rendering path
planning in uneven terrain unreliable. Therefore, the cost function for
the Hybrid A* algorithm is redesigned to match the cost map obtained
in Section 4.2.
The Hybrid A* algorithm chooses the node with the lowest total cost
value 𝑐 from the priority queue to appear each time, where the total
cost value corresponding to node 𝑛 is defined as 𝑐(𝑛) = 𝑔𝑠(𝑛)+ ℎ𝑔(𝑛). The
cumulative cost 𝑔 designed according to ( 15) considers the recovery
cost and is defined as:
𝑔𝑠(𝑛) =
𝑛−1∑
𝑘=1
(𝑤1 ⋅ 𝑙𝑘,𝑘+1 + 𝑤2 ⋅ 𝐂𝐭 (𝑖𝑘+1, 𝑗𝑘+1)), (17)
where the subscript 𝑠 denotes the accumulation from the starting state,
𝑙𝑘,𝑘+1 is the length of the path elapsed from time 𝑘 to time 𝑘 + 1, and
𝑤1, 𝑤2 are weighting factors, which can be adjusted according to the
actual experimental conditions. For the heuristic cost ℎ, we account
for not only the kinetic constraints and obstacle constraints but also
the total cost on the prediction path. Therefore, the heuristic cost ℎ is
defined as:
ℎ𝑔(𝑛) = 𝑚𝑎𝑥(ℎ𝑟𝑠(𝑛), ℎ2𝑑 (𝑛)), (18)
where ℎ𝑟𝑠(𝑛) denotes the cumulative cost of the Reeds–Shepp curve
(Reeds and Shepp , 1990 ) considering wheeled robot dynamics con-
straints but not obstacles from the current state 𝑠𝑛 to the end state 𝑠𝑔.
The cumulative cost of the path refers to the sum of the corresponding
generated trajectory values containing nodes in 𝐂𝐭. ℎ2𝑑 (𝑛) denotes the
cumulative cost of the path from 𝑠𝑛 to 𝑠𝑔 without considering vehicle
dynamics constraints but considering obstacles. This path is given by
the two-dimensional A* algorithm ( Zhang et al. , 2022) using (17) as
the cumulative cost function and the Euclidean distance from 𝑠𝑛 to 𝑠𝑔
as the heuristic function. (18) is applied to ensure that ℎ𝑔(𝑛) = ℎ2𝑑 (𝑛) is
satisfied if the robot is far from 𝑠𝑔 for emphasizing obstacle avoidance
to approach the goal quickly. Inversely, if the robot is closer to 𝑠𝑔,
Engineering Applications of Artiϧcial Intelligence 138 (2024) 109339 
6 

===== PAGE 7 =====
B. Zhang et al.
Table 3
Comparison of experimental results of two cost functions.
Metrics Cost function Mean Best
TL Standard 28.64 21.93
Proposed 37.83 24.51
CSR Standard 0.39 0.28
Proposed 0.21 0.17
ℎ𝑔(𝑛) = ℎ𝑟𝑠(𝑛) is satisfied, ensuring that the robot can approach the
target point with the appropriate pose. The Hybrid A* algorithm is
configured with both standard and proposed cost functions respectively
to compare which cost function can result in more reliable trajectory
planning. Additionally, two evaluation metrics are set:
• Trajectory Length (TL) - The length of the robot’s trajectory (m).
• Cumulative Slope and Roughness (CSR) - The sum of the gradient
and unevenness values of the cell passed by the robot along the
trajectory divided by the TL, where a lower value indicates a safer
trajectory.
Table 3 shows the results of using the Hybrid A* algorithm with
the standard and unique cost functions to plan 30 trajectories indepen-
dently. The higher CSR observed in the standard cost function can be
attributed to its exclusive reliance on distance information, neglecting
to account for environmental risk information. As a result, the planning
algorithm incurs a penalty if detour decisions are predicated upon se-
curity concerns. In contrast, the proposed cost function associated with
lower CSR values indicates the trajectories’ effectiveness for avoiding
medium to high-risk areas and the reliability of the Hybrid A* algo-
rithm. Moreover, the trajectories planned based on the proposed cost
function have a higher TL compared with the standard cost function.
This is attributed to the detour processing made by the proposed cost
function to enhance safety by avoiding certain medium to high-risk
areas (see Fig. 4(b)).
5. Experimental result
In this section, the implementation of proposed method in real out-
door scenarios is presented. Then, the evaluation metrics are explained
and the experimental results are discussed.
5.1. Implementation
The robot used in the experiments is equipped with a four-wheel
differential chassis as a mobile carrier, an Oster OS0-128 LiDAR, an
SBG-Ellipse-N INS, a dual real-time kinematics (RTK) antenna for re-
ceiving GPS satellite signals, a microcomputer (NUC) that houses an
Nvidia RTX 2060 GPU and an Intel i7 CPU, and two auxiliary debugging
peripherals, a screen and Wi-Fi. The NUC is installed with Ubuntu 18.04
and ROS Melodic (See Fig. 5).
All our programs run in the ROS environment. DEM data are ob-
tained using the elevation mapping ROS package ( Fankhauser et al. ,
2018) with point clouds generated by LiDAR. INS and GPS are used to
obtain the vehicle position. The demonstration trajectories are obtained
by human remote control operations. The code for our method is
lightweight enough that all the ROS packages can be run together in
real time on the NUC.
5.2. Evaluation metrics
In addition to the TL and CSR metrics mentioned in Section 4.3, the
subsequent metrics are utilized to compare the navigation performance
of proposed method with the motion primitive library (MPL) ( Silver
et al. , 2008 ) and the inverse optimal control (IOC) ( Wigness et al. ,
2018) in outdoor scenarios. The MPL method is based on imitation
learning and uses maximum margin planning to learn costs given desir-
able trajectory demonstrations. The IOC method is based on maximum
entropy IRL, which does not map features to the environment.
Fig. 5. Robot with associated sensors and auxiliary peripherals.
• Success Rate (SR) - The number of times the robot successfully
reaches the target goal while avoiding obstacles and high-risk
areas divided by the total number of attempts. A value closer to
1 indicates a higher practical feasibility of the method.
• Planning Time (PT) - The algorithm’s computational time for
trajectory planning (ms).
• Modified Hausdorff Distance (MHD) - The Hausdorff distance be-
tween the method planning trajectory and the human-
demonstrated trajectory, defined as:
ℎ(𝜁𝐿, 𝜁𝐸 ) = 1
|𝜁𝐿|
∑
𝑠𝑖∈𝜁𝐿
(
min
𝑠𝑗 ∈𝜁𝐸
̂𝑑 (𝑠𝑖, 𝑠𝑗
))
, (19)
where 𝜁𝐿 is the trajectory to be compared, 𝜁𝐸 is the human-
demonstrated trajectory, and the function ̂𝑑 indicates the distance
between two states along these trajectories. A lower value indi-
cates that the trajectory planned by the method is more similar
to the human demonstrations.
The CSR, TL and SR metrics represent our attention to plan tra-
jectories with lower accumulated risk, shorter trajectory lengths, and
successful arrival at the destination. In the training scenarios, the MHD
metric additionally signifies our desire for the planned trajectories to
closely resemble the demonstrations. Furthermore, this paper focuses
primarily on the risk characteristics of the environments, while ignoring
the additional energy consumption caused by risky regions. Considering
that the controller intends to maintain a relatively constant robot
speed, the trajectory length can be seen as a reflection of the energy
consumption.
5.3. Testing scenarios
Our autonomous navigation framework is trained and tested in the
following three outdoor scenarios and compared with the previously
mentioned methods:
• Scenario A - a training scenario consisting of an uneven outdoor
terrain environment with elevation values ranging from 0 to 2 m.
The robot acquires the reward function 𝑅 by learning from hu-
man demonstrations in scenario A. Twenty human-demonstrated
trajectories are acquired by human remote control operation
of the robot, which contains a preference for areas with low
environmental risk (see Fig. 1).
• Scenario B - a test scenario consisting of an uneven outdoor
terrain environment with elevation values ranging from 0 to
1.5 m. Scenario B serves as a generalization test scenario, where
experiments do not involve IRL process. The reward function𝑅 in
Engineering Applications of Artiϧcial Intelligence 138 (2024) 109339 
7 

===== PAGE 8 =====
B. Zhang et al.
Fig. 6. The correlation between the number of demonstration trajectories and the
quality of generating cost maps. A smaller value of CSR and MHD indicates a higher
quality of the cost map corresponding to the trajectory.
Scenario B is learned from the human demonstrations in Scenario
A (see Fig. 8(a)).
• Scenario C - a test scenario consisting of an urban environment
with a high curb and small slope, where the curb is well above
the ground clearance of the robot and must be safely avoided.
Similar to Scenario B, Scenario C also serves as a generalization
test scenario (see Fig. 8(c)).
5.4. Comparison and analysis
To validate the correlation between different numbers of demon-
stration trajectories and the quality of the generated cost maps, a
comparison is performed between proposed method and other methods
in generating the cost maps using various numbers of demonstration
trajectories in Scenario A. To mitigate potential impacts from planning
algorithm parameters and the robot’s intrinsic state, a fixed-parameter
A* algorithm is employed to generate a single trajectory. Since the
actual optimal cost map is unknown, the validation of the cost map
quality was performed indirectly by assessing the performance of the
trajectories planned on the map. CSR and MHD metrics are used to
evaluate the quality of the generated cost maps.
The experimental results (see Fig. 6 ) show that if the number
of demonstration trajectories is less than 15, increasing the number
of demonstration trajectories for all three methods consistently leads
to a significant reduction in both the CSR and MHD values of the
generated trajectory. This observation indicates an improvement in the
quality of the generated cost maps. The effect above occurs due to
the increase in the number of demonstration trajectories, resulting in a
higher frequency of visits to significant states 𝐷𝑠𝑡 in both the proposed
approach and IOC methods. As indicated by ( 11), the frequency of
visiting these significant states directly influences the iterative gradient
during the training process, thereby affecting the cost values corre-
sponding to these states in the generated cost map. In the MPL method,
increasing the number of demonstration trajectories further restricts the
space of possible cost functions, thereby encouraging the learned cost
function to get closer to the underlying optimal cost function. Once
the number of demonstration trajectories exceeds twenty, increasing
the number of demonstration trajectories has a marginal effect on the
quality of the cost maps generated. Therefore, a consistent set of twenty
demonstration trajectories is employed in subsequent experiments to
train the proposed method, IOC and MPL methods.
Twenty human-demonstrated trajectories (see Fig. 1 (b)) are uni-
formly used by different methods for training, and each method per-
forms 30 experiments, resulting in 30 obtained trajectories. The opti-
mization curve of parameter 𝜃 during training is shown in Fig. 7 . The
optimization of parameter 𝜃 using the MPL and IOC methods takes
38.083 and 47.579 s, respectively, while the convergence process of
Fig. 7. Optimization process of parameter 𝜃. The convergence criterion is defined as
the absolute change 𝛥𝜃 < 0.0001 (𝑙𝑜𝑔𝛥𝜃 < −4). This indicates that the parameter 𝜃 has
reached a stable solution and the optimization is finished.
Table 4
Experimental results.
Metrics Method Scenario A Scenario B Scenario C
Mean Best Mean Best Mean Best
SR
MPL 0.93 – 0.80 – 0.17 –
IOC 0.90 – 0.87 – 0.57 –
Ours 0.93 – 0.90 – 0.93 –
PT
MPL 317.99 298.23 232.19 185.32 252.77 207.62
IOC 284.23 265.19 210.73 189.47 224.60 193.57
Ours 393.92 344.17 249.41 198.56 326.89 274.33
TL
MPL 58.33 52.62 25.74 21.87 28.02 23.49
IOC 62.25 51.57 30.29 25.64 35.33 29.69
Ours 61.94 59.72 29.14 27.91 43.12 40.51
CSR
MPL 0.26 0.22 0.28 0.23 0.67 0.31
IOC 0.27 0.19 0.22 0.17 0.37 0.29
Ours 0.22 0.20 0.19 0.15 0.21 0.18
MHD
MPL 2.15 1.41 – – – –
IOC 1.97 1.31 – – – –
Ours 1.56 1.35 – – – –
parameter 𝜃 in the proposed method takes only 11.843 s, which is
significantly faster than that of the MPL and IOC methods. This is due to
the feature mapping method mentioned in Section 4.1 , which reduces
the computational effort of the optimization process by reducing the
number of states to 100(𝑘 = 10) in the 200 × 200 DEM. In contrast, the
MPL and IOC methods perform feature mapping by cell coordinates,
which results in a DEM containing 40,000 feature vectors and a longer
optimization process.
The experimental results are listed in Table 4 . The SR statistical
results show that all methods have a higher success rate in the training
environment, and the proposed method’s success rate remains high
in the test environment. In contrast, the MPL and IOC methods have
decreased SRs. This is because proposed method selects the lowest risk
area for navigation through terrain feature mapping. However, since
the MPL and IOC methods do not feature maps of the environment, the
absence of some environmental features in the new scenario results in
a reduction in the SR. Furthermore, MPL, based on imitation learning,
has a more severe feature loss in the new environment Scenario C,
which is different from the training environment Scenario A, leading
to a lower navigation SR.
The TL and CSR values in Table 4 show that proposed method
navigates through the least costly state points, resulting in a lower
average trajectory risk. Thus, these TL and CSR values validate the
reliability of proposed method. However, this also results in an increase
in TL compared to other methods. The PT metrics in Table 4 show that
the proposed method takes more time in trajectory planning compared
with IOC and MPL. The reason is that the proposed method necessi-
tates extra computation of Reeds–Shepp curves when calculating the
heuristic function (18). Additionally, the longer trajectories generated
Engineering Applications of Artiϧcial Intelligence 138 (2024) 109339 
8 

===== PAGE 9 =====
B. Zhang et al.
Fig. 8. Robot trajectories navigating in different testing scenarios using proposed method (pink), IOC (purple) and MPL (orange). (a) Testing Scenario B. (b) The corresponding
cost map generated by proposed method for Scenario B. (c) Testing Scenario C. (d) The corresponding cost map generated by proposed method for Scenario C.
by the proposed method result in a larger search space during the
planning process, leading to an increase in PT. In this paper, the robot’s
maximum speed is 2 m/s, and PT values below 500 ms are sufficient for
the robot to perform navigation tasks. Therefore, the PT values for the
proposed method in Table 4 are considered acceptable. In addition, the
MHD values in Table 4 confirm that the trajectories generated by the
proposed method are closer to the optimal navigation behavior defined
by the human demonstrations, indicating that the proposed method
learns human strategy 𝜋𝐸 more effectively. The MHD metric is not
applicable in Scenarios B and C because the MHD metric is used to
evaluate the similarity between trajectories generated by the proposed
method and human-demonstrated trajectories, and Scenarios B and C
serve as generalization test scenarios, not involving the IRL process.
Human demonstrations are only conducted in Scenario A.
In urban environment Scenario C, the curbs above the robot’s
ground clearance pose a challenge for all methods, and the lower eleva-
tion gain in the curb regions is likely to lead to erroneous trajectories.
However, proposed method can focus on the low-risk feature regions
near the curb, thus achieving a higher SR than other methods. It is
observed that the paths from proposed method have low cumulative
slope and roughness and can handle challenging curb scenarios (See
Fig. 8(d)).
6. Conclusions
This study introduced a traversability learning method based on
human demonstration for generating risk cost maps. Proposed method
combines geometry-based terrain feature extraction with MCE IRL to
generate a cost map, and employs the hybrid A* algorithm with a
proposed cost function to generate the least-cost trajectory. Proposed
method is compared with other IRL-based navigation methods on vari-
ous metrics on a real wheeled robot and uneven outdoor environments
to demonstrate its effectiveness.
Despite the promising result, our method still has some limitations
that require future investigation. For example, the limited perceptual
capability of LiDAR prevents the robot from discriminating between
different soil materials. This limitation can be addressed in the future
by incorporating visual information from a camera. In addition, our
method may not perform well in new environments that differ signifi-
cantly from the training environment. For instance, in the challenging
newly-appeared surfaces stricken by disasters, the generalization of our
method might be compromised without sufficient demonstrated data
for these new features. This issue will be addressed by adding online
demonstration correction and integrating LFD results from multiple
scenarios. Finally, it can be anticipated that the combination of large
models with big data can significantly enhance the representational
capability of IRL methods. In other words, large models will enable IRL
to improve algorithm performance in different scenarios by learning
from massive human demonstration data. This is an important direction
for future improvements to our method.
CRediT authorship contribution statement
Bo Zhang: Writing – review & editing, Supervision, Funding acqui-
sition, Formal analysis, Conceptualization. Guobin Li: Writing – origi-
nal draft, Software, Methodology, Investigation, Formal analysis. Jiale
Zhang: Writing – review & editing, Software, Data curation. Xiaoshan
Bai: Visualization, Validation, Resources, Funding acquisition.
Declaration of competing interest
The authors declare that they have no known competing finan-
cial interests or personal relationships that could have appeared to
influence the work reported in this paper.
Data availability
Data will be made available on request.
Engineering Applications of Artiϧcial Intelligence 138 (2024) 109339 
9 

===== PAGE 10 =====
B. Zhang et al.
Acknowledgments
This work was supported in part by the National Natural Sci-
ence Foundation of China (NSFC) (No. 62173234, 62003217, and
62373255), the Natural Science Foundation of Guangdong Province
(No. 2024A1515011204), the Shenzhen Science and Technology Pro-
gram (No. 20220818095816035), and the Shenzhen Natural Science
Fund through the Stable Support Plan Program (No. 20220809175
803001).
Appendix A. Supplementary data
Supplementary material related to this article can be found online
at https://doi.org/10.1016/j.engappai.2024.109339.
The video link illustrates an experimental demonstration of inno-
vative autonomous navigation technology detailed in the paper titled
‘‘Autonomous Navigation Inverse Reinforcement Learning Feature Map-
ping Uneven Terrain’’. It fuses human risk awareness with machine
learning capabilities. By analyzing terrain data, we construct a feature
vector and employ inverse reinforcement learning to refine the reward
function, thus producing a risk map. This approach markedly en-
hances both the efficiency and safety of robotic navigation in intricate
environments, with experimental results confirming its outstanding
performance. Below are the web links to our permanent video viewing
and downloads.
https://drive.google.com/file/d/1sugnU8GZQDf5bgyPDDfxzqWIXn
AaWUNd/view
References
Argall, B.D., Chernova, S., Veloso, M., Browning, B., 2009. A survey of robot learning
from demonstration. Robot. Auton. Syst. 57 (5), 469–483.
Chen, Z., Alonso-Mora, J., Bai, X., Harabor, D.D., Stuckey, P.J., 2021. Integrated task
assignment and path planning for capacitated multi-agent pickup and delivery. IEEE
Robot. Autom. Lett. 6 (3), 5816–5823.
Chen, M., Nikolaidis, S., Soh, H., Hsu, D., Srinivasa, S.S., 2020. Trust-aware decision
making for human-robot collaboration. ACM Trans. Hum.-Robot Interact. 9 (2),
1–23.
Dolgov, D., Thrun, S., Montemerlo, M., Diebel, J., 2008. Practical search techniques
in path planning for autonomous driving. In: International Symposium on Search
Techniques in Artificial Intelligence and Robotics. STAIR, pp. 29–34.
Fankhauser, P., Bloesch, M., Hutter, M., 2018. Probabilistic terrain mapping for mobile
robots with uncertain localization. IEEE Robot. Autom. Lett. 3 (4), 3019–3026.
Guan, T., He, Z., Manocha, D., Zhang, L., 2023. TNES: terrain traversability mapping,
navigation and excavation system for autonomous excavators on worksite. Auton.
Robots 47 (6), 695–714.
Guastella, D.C., Muscato, G., 2021. Learning-based methods of perception and naviga-
tion for ground vehicles in unstructured environments: A review. Sensors 21 (1),
73.
Howard, T.M., Kelly, A., 2007. Optimal rough terrain trajectory generation for wheeled
mobile robots. Int. J. Robot. Res. 26 (2), 141–166.
Josef, S., Degani, A., 2020. Deep reinforcement learning for safe local planning of
a ground vehicle in unknown rough terrain. IEEE Robot. Autom. Lett. 5 (4),
6748–6755.
Kahn, G., Abbeel, P., Levine, S., 2021. BADGR: An autonomous self-supervised
learning-based navigation system. IEEE Robot. Autom. Lett. 6 (2), 1312–1319.
Kim, B., Pineau, J., 2016. Socially adaptive path planning in human environments using
inverse reinforcement learning. Int. J. Soc. Robot. 8 (1), 51–66.
Konolige, K., Agrawal, M., Blas, M.R., Bolles, R.C., Gerkey, B., Sola, J., Sundaresan, A.,
2009. Mapping, navigation, and learning for off-road traversal. J. Field Robotics
26 (1), 88–113.
Merhy, B.A., Payeur, P., Petriu, E.M., 2008. Application of segmented 2-D probabilistic
occupancy maps for robot sensing and navigation. IEEE Trans. Instrum. Meas. 57
(12), 2827–2837.
Nair, A., McGrew, B., Andrychowicz, M., Zaremba, W., Abbeel, P., 2018. Overcom-
ing exploration in reinforcement learning with demonstrations. In: 2018 IEEE
International Conference on Robotics and Automation. ICRA, pp. 6292–6299.
Pérez-Higueras, N., Caballero, F., Merino, L., 2018. Teaching robot navigation behaviors
to optimal RRT planners. Int. J. Soc. Robot. 10 (2), 235–249.
Pivtoraiko, M., Knepper, R.A., Kelly, A., 2009. Differentially constrained mobile robot
motion planning in state lattices. J. Field Robotics 26 (3), 308–333.
Rankin, A.L., Maimone, M.W., Biesiadecki, J.J., Patel, N., Levine, D., Toupet, O., 2021.
Mars curiosity rover mobility trends during the first 7 years. J. Field Robotics 38
(5), 759–800.
Reeds, J.A., Shepp, L.A., 1990. Optimal paths for a car that goes both forwards and
backwards. Pacific J. Math. 145 (2), 367–393.
Sathyamoorthy, A.J., Weerakoon, K.M.K., Guan, T., Liang, J., Manocha, D., 2022.
Terrapn: Unstructured terrain navigation using online self-supervised learning. In:
2022 IEEE/RSJ International Conference on Intelligent Robots and Systems. IROS,
pp. 7197–7204.
Shah, D., Levine, S., 2022. ViKiNG: Vision-based kilometer-scale navigation with
geographic hints. In: Robotics: Science and Systems. RSS.
Shan, T., Englot, B., Meyers, D., Wang, W., Ratti, C., Rus, D., 2020. LIO-SAM: Tightly-
coupled lidar inertial odometry via smoothing and mapping. In: 2020 IEEE/RSJ
International Conference on Intelligent Robots and Systems. IROS, pp. 5135–5142.
Shimoda, S., Kuroda, Y., Iagnemma, K., 2005. Potential field navigation of high
speed unmanned ground vehicles on uneven terrain. In: 2005 IEEE International
Conference on Robotics and Automation. ICRA, pp. 2828–2833.
Silver, D., Bagnell, J.A., Stentz, A., 2008. High performance outdoor navigation from
overhead data using imitation learning. In: Robotics: Science and Systems. RSS.
Siva, S., Wigness, M.B., Rogers, J.G., 2019. Robot adaptation to unstructured terrains by
joint representation and apprenticeship learning. In: Robotics: Science and Systems
(RSS).
Siva, S., Wigness, M.B., Rogers, J.G., Quang, L., Zhang, H., 2021. Self-reflective
terrain-aware robot adaptation for consistent off-road ground navigation. arXiv
arXiv:2111.06742.
Siva, S., Wigness, M.B., Rogers, J.G., Quang, L., Zhang, H., 2022. NAUTS: Negotiation
for adaptation to unstructured terrain surfaces. In: 2022 IEEE/RSJ International
Conference on Intelligent Robots and Systems. IROS, pp. 1733–1740.
Suger, B., Steder, B., Burgard, W., 2015. Traversability analysis for mobile robots in
outdoor environments: A semi-supervised learning approach based on 3D-lidar data.
In: 2015 IEEE International Conference on Robotics and Automation. ICRA, pp.
3941–3946.
Triest, S., Castro, M.G., Maheshwari, P., Sivaprakasam, M., Wang, W., Scherer, S.,
2023. Learning risk-aware costmaps via inverse reinforcement learning for off-road
navigation. In: 2023 IEEE International Conference on Robotics and Automation.
ICRA, pp. 924–930.
Weerakoon, K.M.K., Sathyamoorthy, A.J., Patel, U., Manocha, D., 2022. TERP: Reliable
planning in uneven outdoor environments using deep reinforcement learning. In:
2022 International Conference on Robotics and Automation. ICRA, pp. 9447–9453.
Wigness, M.B., Rogers, J.G., Navarro-Serment, L.E., 2018. Robot navigation from human
demonstration: Learning control behaviors. In: 2018 IEEE International Conference
on Robotics and Automation. ICRA, pp. 1150–1157.
Wulfmeier, M., Rao, D., Wang, D.Z., Ondruska, P., Posner, I., 2017. Large-scale cost
function learning for path planning using deep inverse reinforcement learning. Int.
J. Robot. Res. 36 (10), 1073–1087.
Wulfmeier, M., Wang, D.Z., Posner, I., 2016. Watch this: Scalable cost-function
learning for path planning in urban environments. In: 2016 IEEE/RSJ International
Conference on Intelligent Robots and Systems. IROS, pp. 2089–2095.
Wurm, K.M., Kümmerle, R., Stachniss, C., Burgard, W., 2009. Improving robot naviga-
tion in structured outdoor environments by identifying vegetation from laser data.
In: 2009 IEEE/RSJ International Conference on Intelligent Robots and Systems.
IROS, pp. 1217–1222.
Xie, Z., Zhang, Q., Jiang, Z., Liu, H., 2020. Robot learning from demonstration for path
planning: A review. Sci. China Technol. Sci. 63 (8), 1325–1334.
You, C., Lu, J., Filev, D., Tsiotras, P., 2019. Advanced planning for autonomous
vehicles using reinforcement learning and deep inverse reinforcement learning.
Robot. Auton. Syst. 114, 1–18.
Zhang, B., Li, G., Zheng, Q., Bai, X., Ding, Y., Khan, A., 2022. Path planning for wheeled
mobile robot in partially known uneven terrain. Sensors 22 (14), 5217.
Zhang, K., Niroui, F., Ficocelli, M., Nejat, G., 2018. Robot navigation of environments
with unknown rough terrain using deep reinforcement learning. In: 2018 IEEE
International Symposium on Safety, Security, and Rescue Robotics. SSRR, pp. 1–7.
Ziebart, B.D., Bagnell, J.A., Dey, A.K., 2013. The principle of maximum causal entropy
for estimating interacting processes. IEEE Trans. Inform. Theory 59 (4), 1966–1980.
Engineering Applications of Artiϧcial Intelligence 138 (2024) 109339 
10 