

===== PAGE 1 =====
Engineering Applications of Artificial Intelligence 120 (2023) 105891
Contents lists available at ScienceDirect
Engineering Applications of Artificial Intelligence
journal homepage: www.elsevier.com/locate/engappai
Multi-UAV trajectory optimizer: A sustainable system for wireless data
harvesting with deep reinforcement learning✩
Mincheol Seong a, Ohyun Job, Kyungseop Shinc,∗
a The Republic of Korea Army, Daejeon, The Republic of Korea
b Department of Computer Science, Chungbuk National University, Cheongju, The Republic of Korea
c Department of Computer Science, Sangmyung University, Seoul, The Republic of Korea
A R T I C L E I N F O
Keywords:
Wireless sensor network
UAVs
Data harvesting
MARL
Transfer learning
Scenario parameters
A B S T R A C T
A wireless sensor network assisted by multiple autonomous unmanned aerial vehicles (UAVs) is a promising
solution for harvesting data and monitoring the circumstance in various applications. However, the complicated
path planning problem of each UAV is still problematic. In this paper, we propose an optimal operation
strategy based on multi-agent reinforcement learning (MARL) to tackle these hurdles. Various parameters
such as the number of deployed UAVs, charging start capacity, and charging complete capacity define a
multi-UAV system. This approach is applicable without a time-consuming and costly policy control. We also
describe how to balance multiple objectives, such as data harvesting, charging, and collision avoidance, using
transfer learning. Finally, learning a policy control that generalizes multiple scenario parameters allows us
to analyze the performance of individual parameters in a specific scenario, which helps find the macro-level
optimal parameter within a particular scenario. Videos are available at https://github.com/mincheolseong/
UAV-Trajectory-Optimizer.
1. Introduction
There are many fields where data harvesting applications are
needed; preventing large-scale disasters, unmanned farming systems,
watching in the military system, monitoring natural environment
changes, et al.. For example, it is essential to continuously monitor
changes in the sea environment, such as climate change or contaminant
detection. Many studies have been conducted for dynamic information
monitoring systems in the sea environment through wireless sensor
nodes (Alkandari et al., 2012; Bottarelli et al., 2019; Liu et al., 2010).
It is still challenging for sensor nodes to collect the data continuously
produced in a sea environment due to the limited transmission energy
and the long distance from a receiver located on land. Autonomous
unmanned aerial vehicles (UAVs) as data harvesters can be one of
the promising solutions to resolve these problems. They have many
advantages over satellites and ground base stations (Kishk et al., 2020).
A quick and straightforward deployment would cover a wide range of
areas and reduce the cost of the infrastructure installed on the land.
This paper focuses on building a UAV-aided data collection system
based on a deep reinforcement learning mechanism to maximize its
sustainability. A team of UAVs consists of a variable number of homo-
geneous drones with the same task of collecting data. While carrying
out these tasks, the UAVs need to return to the charging station when
✩ This work was supported by the National Research Foundation of Korea [grant number 2021R1F1A1064059].
∗ Corresponding author.
E-mail addresses: smc5741@gmail.com (M. Seong), ohyunjo@chungbuk.ac.kr (O. Jo), ksshin@smu.ac.kr (K. Shin).
the battery gets low. This issue imposes complex constraints on the
design of the trajectory of the UAV for optimal data collection with
limited battery capacity. Moreover, avoiding collisions between the
UAVs should be taken into consideration to optimize the efficiency of
the network when the number of UAVs increases.
In this regard, deep reinforcement learning (DRL) might provide
an opportunity to alleviate the challenges to our goals. First, it can
be applied to complex problems with many constraints through an
intuitive combination of reward functions. In addition, bearing in mind
that the UAV control problems in the communication scenario have
been proven to be NP-hard in many cases (Zeng et al., 2019; Zhang
et al., 2019), the DRL is computationally efficient for approaching such
kind of NP-hard problem as shown in Shen et al. (2019).
1.1. Related work
Multi-UAVs are actively being studied for their flexible and effi-
cient operations in various fields, including communications and net-
works (Pérez-Carabaza et al., 2019; Skorobogatov et al., 2020). In Fu
et al. (2021), the authors suggested a method for a UAV to collect
data through wireless charging. They adopted a single agent approach
using Q-learning. However, it is impossible to consider all the complex
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.engappai.2023.105891
Received 6 September 2022; Received in revised form 18 January 2023; Accepted 19 January 2023
Available online 27 January 2023
0952-1976/© 2023 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

===== PAGE 2 =====
M. Seong, O. Jo and K. Shin Engineering Applications of Artificial Intelligence 120 (2023) 105891
constraints and requirements in reality with the single agent approach.
There have been studies on approaches using DRL in UAV-aided net-
works to describe the complex environment in reality (Lahmeri et al.,
2021; Ullah et al., 2020). They considered convolutional neural net-
works and partial observability to define the environment as a par-
tially observable Markov decision process (POMDP) for multi-UAV path
planning. In a vast scenario parameter space in which environmental
parameters are changed, there is no need for a separate relearning
to be introduced in Bayerlein et al. (2021). It is possible to measure
the performance of various scenario parameters. By the way, multiple
objectives including data harvesting, charging, and collision avoidance
have not been considered, which makes multi-UAV unsustainable. In
addition, the agents’ action set is limited to cardinal directions, making
it challenging to clarify the agent’s practical behaviors.
Multiple objectives within the DRL approach are studied in Punma,
Unpublished results (0000), where Deep Q-Network (DQN) and transfer
learning are leveraged in a multi-agent setting. They tried to achieve
multiple objectives for autonomous vehicles to fulfill customer de-
mands for charging in 7 × 7 or 10 × 10 grid environments. However,
to optimize the charging system, it needs to consider more realistic
environments with large grid numbers or detailed charging conditions.
We focus on constructing a sustainable UAV-aided network system
by training UAVs with multiple objectives, including data collection,
navigation constraints, and charging in a dynamic sea environment. To
the best of the authors’ knowledge, this study is the first to address
multi-UAV path planning based on the collective combination of a
multi-agent DRL and a transfer learning in which the learned control
policies can achieve multiple objectives.
1.2. Organization
The rest of this paper is organized as follows. In Section 2, we
describe the system model to present the UAV, network environment,
and channel. All the system parameters are reflected in the POMDP
to consider our practical DRL application scenarios in Section 3. The
multi-agent DRL learning approach and transfer learning to optimize
the system are introduced in Section 4. Simulation results are presented
and analyzed in Section 5. Our conclusions and prospects for future
work are given in Section 6.
2. System model
2.1. Environmental model
In this section, a system model is presented to make the RL approach
applicable to the real world’s dynamics. The architecture and the pa-
rameters are designed for applying the RL method to our environmental
model.
The first step required to apply the RL model is to create an
environmental model that reflects the behavior of the agents which is
likely to occur in real environments. This environmental model contains
places where UAVs can take off and charge and sensing points where
sensor nodes are located. An example of a grid world is illustrated
in Fig. 1, and a single UAV trajectory is marked as described in the
attached legend in Table 1.
2.2. UAV model
The UAVs are placed and move within the grid world with a size of
𝑀 × 𝑀. The state of UAV 𝑖 at time 𝑡, 𝒔𝑖(𝑡), includes the following three
elements:
(1) position 𝒑𝑖(𝑡) = [ 𝑥𝑖(𝑡), 𝑦𝑖(𝑡), 𝑧𝑖(𝑡)]𝑇 ∈ R3, where the altitude 𝑧𝑖(𝑡) ∈
{ℎ} is a constant altitude ℎ;
(2) operational status 𝝓𝑖(𝑡) ∈ {0, 1}, either inactive or active;
(3) battery energy level 𝒃𝑖(𝑡) ∈ N.
Fig. 1. Example of a single UAV system of size 16 × 16 collecting data from sensor
nodes with a blue-colored start and charging zone 𝐋. Colored circles refer to sensor
nodes, and different colors for each node make it easy to figure out which sensor node
the UAV is communicating with.
Table 1
Legend for scenario plots.
Symbol Description
DQN
 Start and charging zone
Input
 Sensor node
Starting positions during an episode
Termination of an episode
Visualization
 UAV movement while comm. with red node
Hovering while comm. with red device
Hovering while charging
Total operation time is set to 𝑻 time steps for all UAVs. A mission
time step with length 𝛿𝑡 is divided into 𝑚 communication time steps. We
use a simple version of charging, considering a partial charging prin-
ciple and serving time from Zhang et al. (2018). The partial charging
principle is to charge only the needed amount without a full charge
when the energy level is low. In realistic environments, the battery
charging process requires service time, expressed as the serving time.
Now, we employ 𝒃𝑛
𝑖 (𝑡) to represent a remaining energy ratio as 𝒃𝑛
𝑖 (𝑡) =
𝒃𝑖(𝑡)∕𝒃𝑖(0) (%). When the UAV starts charging or completes charging,
𝒃𝑛
𝑖 (𝑡) is defined as charging start capacity or charging complete capacity,
respectively, and is described as follows:
(1) charging start capacity (%) 𝐂𝑆;
(2) charging complete capacity (%) 𝐂𝐶.
For instance, 𝐂𝑆 = 20 means that the UAV can charge its energy
from 20% of the full battery capacity, and 𝐂𝐶 = 70 means that the
UAV charges up to 70% of the full battery capacity. Here, we define
the relation between 𝐂𝑆 and 𝐂𝐶 as
10 ≤ 𝐂𝑆 < 𝐂𝐶 ≤ 100, (1)
where 𝐂𝐶 is always greater than 𝐂𝑆, and UAVs cannot charge their
energy beyond 100% of the entire battery capacity.
Each UAV is authorized to choose their action from action spaces,
𝐀 = {𝑁𝑜𝑟𝑡ℎ, 𝐸𝑎𝑠𝑡, 𝑆𝑜𝑢𝑡ℎ, 𝑊 𝑒𝑠𝑡, 𝑁𝑜𝑟𝑡ℎ − 𝐸𝑎𝑠𝑡, 𝑆𝑜𝑢𝑡ℎ − 𝐸𝑎𝑠𝑡, 𝑁𝑜𝑟𝑡ℎ −
𝐸𝑎𝑠𝑡, 𝑆𝑜𝑢𝑡ℎ − 𝑊 𝑒𝑠𝑡, 𝐻𝑜𝑣𝑒𝑟 }. While the UAV is charging, the required
action of the UAV is 𝐻𝑜𝑣𝑒𝑟. In order to force the action to 𝐻𝑜𝑣𝑒𝑟
regardless of which actions a UAV selects in the action space 𝐀, each
UAV’s physical action 𝐚𝑖(𝑡) ∈ ̃𝐀(𝒔𝑖(𝑡)) can be limited to (2) if a charging
condition 𝐂𝑖(𝑡) is satisfied,
̃𝐀(𝒔𝑖(𝑡)) =
{
𝐻𝑜𝑣𝑒𝑟, 𝐂𝑖(𝑡) = 1 ∧ 𝒃𝑛
𝑖 (𝑡) ≤ 𝐂𝐶
𝐀, 𝑜𝑡ℎ𝑒𝑟𝑤𝑖𝑠𝑒,
(2)
which means that once a UAV starts charging, it has to keep charging
until 𝒃𝑛
𝑖 (𝑡) = 𝐂𝐶.
2

===== PAGE 3 =====
M. Seong, O. Jo and K. Shin Engineering Applications of Artificial Intelligence 120 (2023) 105891
The charging determination 𝜄𝑖(𝑡) is required to start charging when
𝒃𝑛
𝑖 (𝑡) is lower than 𝐂𝑆 and to charge the battery until it reaches 𝐂𝐶.
𝜄𝑖(𝑡) =
{
1, 𝒃𝑛
𝑖 (𝑡𝑝) ≤ 𝐂𝑆
0, 𝒃𝑛
𝑖 (𝑡) > 𝐂𝐶 ,
(3)
where 𝑡𝑝 is a fixed prior time slot before 𝑡. Note that the default value
of 𝜄𝑖(𝑡) at the beginning of an episode is 0.
The charging condition 𝐂𝑖(𝑡) is defined as follows in which the 𝑖th
UAV starts to charge its energy only when the following conditions are
satisfied.
𝐂𝑖(𝑡) =
⎧
⎪
⎪
⎨
⎪
⎪⎩
1, 𝒑𝑖(𝑡) ∈ 𝐋
∧ 𝜄𝑖(𝑡) = 1
∧ 𝒂𝑖(𝑡) = 𝐻𝑜𝑣𝑒𝑟
0, 𝑜𝑡ℎ𝑒𝑟𝑤𝑖𝑠𝑒.
(4)
The maximum displacement with which a UAV can move in one
mission time slot is the grid cell size 𝑐. The speed of a UAV 𝐯𝑖(𝑡) is
constant within a time slot by dividing enough communication time
slots. 𝐯𝑖(𝑡) is upper bounded to moving at a horizontal velocity 𝑉 = 𝑐∕𝛿𝑡
or hovering, i.e, 𝐯𝑖(𝑡) ∈ {0, 𝑉 } for all 𝑡 ∈ [0, 𝑇 ].
The position of the UAV is updated by
𝒑𝑖(𝑡 + 1) =
{
𝒑𝑖(𝑡) + 𝒂𝑖(𝑡), 𝜙 𝑖(𝑡) = 1
𝒑𝑖(𝑡), 𝑜𝑡ℎ𝑒𝑟𝑤𝑖𝑠𝑒,
(5)
making the UAV update only if active.
A communication quota of each UAV 𝐔𝑖(𝑡) ∈ {0, 1} indicates
communication is either incomplete or complete, which can only be
achieved through at least one charge. Note that the predefined goal of
a communication quota of 𝐔𝐶 ∈ N satisfies the following relation,
𝑚 × 𝒃𝑖(0) < 𝐔𝐶 , (6)
where 𝑚 ∈ N is used to divide a mission time slot into𝑚 communication
time slots (see Section 2.3). If a UAV takes off, 𝐔𝑖(𝑡) is incomplete, and
𝐔𝑖(𝑡) is complete when the cumulative number of communications of
the agent reaches 𝐔𝐶.
The evolution of the operational status 𝝓𝑖(𝑡) of each UAV is given
by
𝝓𝑖(𝑡 + 1) =
⎧
⎪
⎪
⎨
⎪
⎪⎩
0, 𝐔𝑖(𝑡 + 1) = 1
∨ 𝝓𝑖(𝑡) = 0
∨ 𝑏𝑖(𝑡 + 1) = 0
1, 𝑜𝑡ℎ𝑒𝑟𝑤𝑖𝑠𝑒,
(7)
where if the UAV takes off, 𝝓𝑖(𝑡) is always active, and the opera-
tional status 𝝓𝑖(𝑡) is inactivated when the communication quota 𝐔𝑖(𝑡)
is completed or the battery energy is depleted.
The 𝑖th UAV’s battery energy level is updated according to
𝒃𝑖(𝑡 + 1) =
⎧
⎪
⎨
⎪⎩
𝒃𝑖(𝑡) − 1, 𝜙 𝑖(𝑡) = 1 ∧ 𝐂𝑖(𝑡) = 0
𝒃𝑖(𝑡) + 10, 𝜙 𝑖(𝑡) = 1 ∧ 𝐂𝑖(𝑡) = 1
𝒃𝑖(𝑡), 𝑜𝑡ℎ𝑒𝑟𝑤𝑖𝑠𝑒,
(8)
where the battery energy level of each UAV 𝒃𝑖(𝑡) is continuously de-
creased by 1 at each time slot when the operational status is active.
Since the battery continues to decrease by one according to the time
slot, the remaining battery capacity equals the remaining flying time.
UAVs can charge their battery energy level by ten at each time slot
when charging.
2.3. Communication channel model
To describe the communications between the UAVs and the sensor
nodes, we introduce the concept of a communication time slot 𝑛 ∈
[0, 𝑵] with 𝑵 = 𝑚𝑻 , which is different from the mission time slot. Each
mission time slot is divided into enough communication time slots so
that the position and channel gain of the UAVs within one communica-
tion time slot can be assumed to be constant. One communication time
slot 𝑛 has length of 𝛿𝑛 = 𝛿𝑡∕𝑚 min.
The 𝑘th sensor node is located with 𝐍𝑘 = [
𝑥𝑘, 𝑦𝑘, 0
]𝐓
∈ R3 with
𝑘 ∈ K where K is the total number of sensor nodes, which have
stable locations during the entire mission time slot 𝑻 and the same
distance between sensor nodes with fixed coordinates. At the start of
the mission, a certain range of random data 𝐃𝑘,𝑖𝑛𝑖𝑡 is assigned to the
𝑘th sensor node, and as information continues to generate data after
the start of the mission, we define that the 𝑘th sensor node generates
new data 𝐃𝑘,𝑛𝑒𝑤 ∼ 𝑃 𝑜𝑖𝑠𝑠𝑜𝑛(𝜆𝑝) according to the Poisson distribution.
A UAV-to-ground channel model (Bayerlein et al., 2020) is em-
ployed to analyze the communications between the UAVs and the
sensor nodes. The maximum achievable data rate in communication
time slot 𝑛 for the 𝑘th sensor node is defined as
𝑅𝑖,𝑘(𝑛) = 𝛿𝑛 log2(1 + SNR𝑖,𝑘(𝑛)). (9)
Note that the length of a communication time slot is multiplied so
that the maximum achievable data rate within a mission time slot is
constant regardless of the number of communications.
We have
SNR𝑖,𝑘(𝑛) =
𝑃𝑖,𝑘
𝜎2 ⋅ 𝑑−𝛼𝑒
𝑖,𝑘 ⋅ 10𝜂𝑒∕10, (10)
where 𝑃𝑘 is the transmit power of sensor node 𝑘, 𝜎2
𝑒 is white Gaussian
noise power at the receiver, 𝑑𝑖,𝑘 is the distance between UAV 𝑖 and
sensor node 𝑘, 𝛼𝑒 is the path loss exponent and 𝜂𝑒 ∼ 𝑵(0, 𝜎2
𝑒 ) is a Gaus-
sian random variable. We assume Line of Sight (LOS) point-to-point
communication, and propagation parameter 𝑒 ∈ {LoS} is defined.
For communication between the sensor nodes and a UAV, we use
the time-division multiple access (TDMA) model as a multiple access
protocol. To utilize the models we defined earlier, three significant
assumptions have been made, without loss of generality. First, it is as-
sumed that the communication channel between a UAV and the sensor
nodes works as an orthogonal resource block with the communication
channel between the other UAVs and the sensor nodes. Hence, there
is no inter-UAV interference. Also, assuming that sensor nodes are in
multi-band mode, a sensor node can communicate with multiple UAVs
simultaneously, which means that scheduling decisions can be ignored
when determining the action space of the UAVs. Lastly, assuming UAVs
always communicate according to the maximum rate, the sensor node
only communicates with at most one UAV in a communication time
slot. Based on the maximum rate constraint, the scheduling variable
𝑞𝑖,𝑘(𝑛) ∈ {0,1} is chosen for all UAVs and all sensor nodes in commu-
nication time slot 𝑛, in which 𝑞𝑖,𝑘(𝑛) is equal to 1 only for the highest
SNR𝑖,𝑘(𝑛).
Then, we can define the 𝑘th sensor node’s residual data within
communication time slot 𝑛 by
𝑑𝑘(𝑛 + 1) = 𝑑𝑘(𝑛) −
I∑
𝑖=1
𝑞𝑖,𝑘(𝑛)𝑅𝑖,𝑘(𝑛)𝛿𝑛, (11)
where I means the total number of agents. The residual data 𝐃𝑘(𝑡) of
the 𝑘th sensor node at mission time slot 𝑡 is
𝐃𝑘(𝑡) =
{
𝐃𝑘,𝑖𝑛𝑖𝑡, 𝑡 = 0
𝑑𝑘(𝑛𝑡) + 𝐃𝑘,𝑛𝑒𝑤, 𝑜𝑡ℎ𝑒𝑟𝑤𝑖𝑠𝑒,
(12)
where 𝑛𝑡 is the communication time slot at mission time slot 𝑡. We also
assume that new data 𝐃𝑘,𝑛𝑒𝑤 is generated at each mission time slot not
each communication time slot.
3. Markov decision process (DEC-POMDP)
The aforementioned operation for the UAV agents and sensor nodes
is analyzed as a decentralized partially observable Markov decision
process (Dec-POMDP) (Oliehoek and Amato, 2016), which is defined
as a septuple (S, A, 𝑇, O, 𝑂, 𝑅, 𝛾) for practical application in RL. S
3

===== PAGE 4 =====
M. Seong, O. Jo and K. Shin Engineering Applications of Artificial Intelligence 120 (2023) 105891
stands for the state space, A is the joint action space, and 𝑇 contains
the transition probability functions. O means the joint observation
space, 𝑂 is the observation probability function that converts state
information into unique observations for one agent. 𝑅 contains the
reward functions. The discount factor 𝛾 determines whether to weigh
long-term or short-term rewards.
3.1. State space
The state space of the multi-agent problem consists of environmen-
tal information, the states of the agents, and the states of the sensor
nodes. It is defined as
𝐒 = 𝐋⏟ ⏟ ⏟
𝑆𝑡𝑎𝑟𝑡 𝑎𝑛𝑑
𝐶ℎ𝑎𝑟𝑔𝑖𝑛𝑔 𝑧𝑜𝑛𝑒
} 𝐸𝑛𝑣𝑖𝑟𝑜𝑛𝑚𝑒𝑛𝑡
× RI×3
⏟ ⏟ ⏟
𝑈 𝐴𝑉
𝑃 𝑜𝑠𝑖𝑡𝑖𝑜𝑛𝑠
× NI
⏟ ⏟ ⏟
𝐹 𝑙𝑦𝑖𝑛𝑔
𝑇 𝑖𝑚𝑒𝑠
× BI
⏟ ⏟ ⏟
𝑂𝑝𝑒𝑟𝑎𝑡𝑖𝑜𝑛𝑎𝑙
𝑆𝑡𝑎𝑡𝑢𝑠
} 𝑈 𝐴𝑉 𝐴𝑔𝑒𝑛𝑡𝑠
× RK×3
⏟ ⏟ ⏟
𝑆𝑒𝑛𝑠𝑜𝑟 𝑁𝑜𝑑𝑒
𝑃 𝑜𝑠𝑖𝑡𝑖𝑜𝑛𝑠
× RK
⏟ ⏟ ⏟
𝑆𝑒𝑛𝑠𝑜𝑟 𝑁𝑜𝑑𝑒
𝑅𝑒𝑠𝑖𝑑𝑢𝑎𝑙 𝐷𝑎𝑡𝑎
. } 𝑆𝑒𝑛𝑠𝑜𝑟 𝑁𝑜𝑑𝑒𝑠
The elements 𝑠𝑖(𝑡) ∈ 𝐒 are
𝑠𝑖(𝑡) = ( 𝐇𝑙𝑎𝑦𝑒𝑟, {
𝒑𝑖(𝑡)
} , {
𝒃𝑖(𝑡)
} , {
𝝓𝑖(𝑡)
} ,
{
𝐍𝑘
} , {
𝐃𝑘(𝑡)
} ), ∀𝑖 ∈ I, ∀𝑘 ∈ K.
(13)
𝐇𝑙𝑎𝑦𝑒𝑟 ∈ B𝐻×𝐻×1 is the tensor layer of the start and charging zone
𝐋. The other parts of the septuple are positions, remaining flying times,
the operational status of all agents, and positions and residual data that
can be collected from all sensor nodes.
3.2. Safety controller
A safety controller is introduced to control the UAV agents so as to
operate within the boundaries of the grid world and avoid collisions
with each other (Bayerlein et al., 2021). The safety controller alerts
agents to cancel a planned action and to hover in the prior position
when the agent’s position in the next time slot reaches the boundaries
of the grid world or is located at the same position as other agents.
The actual action to be executed by the 𝑖th agent through the safety
controller is called a safety action 𝒂𝑠
𝑖 (𝑡).
3.3. Reward function
The operational order of the agents is as follows: advance each agent
simultaneously, resolve their boundary counters or collisions with each
agent, and consume their energy levels. As a result, the agents decide
whether to charge their energy or communicate with the sensor node
with the best data rate. Lastly, new data is generated for each sensor
node. Each of these transitions will have a reward associated with each
agent. The reward function is made up of the following elements:
𝑟𝑖(𝑡) = 𝛼
∑
𝑘∈K
(𝐃𝑘(𝑡 + 1) − 𝐃𝑘(𝑡))+ 𝛽𝑖(𝑡)
+ 𝜈𝑖(𝑡) + 𝑐𝑖(𝑡) + 𝜔𝑖(𝑡) + 𝜁 .
(14)
The first term of the sum is a collective reward for all agents’
collected data from all sensor nodes within a mission time slot 𝑡. It is
weighted through the data collection multiplier 𝛼. The second term is
an individual penalty when agents collide with the boundaries of the
grid world or other agents, and is
𝛽𝑖(𝑡) =
{
𝛽, 𝒂𝑖(𝑡) ≠ 𝒂𝑠
𝑖 (𝑡)
0, 𝑜𝑡ℎ𝑒𝑟𝑤𝑖𝑠𝑒,
(15)
where the penalty is characterized through the safety penalty value 𝛽.
The third term 𝜈𝑖(𝑡) is the individual penalty for not fully communicat-
ing until it runs out of energy, and is given by
𝜈𝑖(𝑡) =
{
𝜈, 𝒃𝑖(𝑡 + 1) = 0 ∧ 𝐔𝑖(𝑡 + 1) = 0
0, 𝑜𝑡ℎ𝑒𝑟𝑤𝑖𝑠𝑒,
(16)
The fourth term is a small positive reward while charging:
𝑐𝑖(𝑡) =
{
𝑐, 𝐂𝑖(𝑡 + 1) = 1 ∧ 𝜙𝑖(𝑡 + 1) = 1
0, 𝑜𝑡ℎ𝑒𝑟𝑤𝑖𝑠𝑒,
(17)
where the reward 𝑐 is utilized to encourage charging. The fifth term is
a positive reward given when the communication quota is fulfilled:
𝜔𝑖(𝑡) =
{
𝜔, 𝐔𝑖(𝑡 + 1) = 1
0, 𝑜𝑡ℎ𝑒𝑟𝑤𝑖𝑠𝑒,
(18)
parametrized through the reward 𝜔 to encourage charging. We found
that simply imposing a large negative penalty 𝜈 when agents run out
of their energy is not enough to balance the two main objectives, data
collecting and charging. We were able to achieve two objectives in a
balanced way with the small positive reward 𝑐 given while charging
and the relatively large positive reward 𝜔 given when the communica-
tion quota was fulfilled as well as transfer learning. The last term 𝜁 is
a constant movement penalty, which induces the agents to find more
efficient trajectories.
3.4. Observation space
We need to change the state space 𝐒 to the observation space for
POMDP. As shown in Theile et al. (2021), we define an observation
space for sensor node data, UAV flying times, and operational status
through map processing algorithms that consist of map centering,
which is the first step, and global-local map processing, which is the
second step. Map centering is to place the agent in the center of the
map to improve the agent’s learning performance. Although there is
a disadvantage of increasing the size of the neural networks to be
trained with several trainable parameters, there is an advantage that
the agent’s action can be planned only based on the relative position
to the features, e.g., the distances to the start and charging zones,
according to the agent’s current position. After map centering, there
are relatively distant features for which the agents should consider
comprehensive path determination and relatively close features such
as collision avoidance for path planning. The second step is to ignore
some of the details of the distant features, significantly reducing the
size of the neural network to be trained while maintaining the training
performance, as shown in Theile et al. (2021).
Mapping
The map centering and global-local algorithms can be used after
the state spaces are stacked in the form of a map layer that projects
the relative features according to the agent’s position. According to the
positions of the agents and sensor nodes, the mapping is performed in
pairs as follows:
({
𝒑𝑖(𝑡)
} , {
𝒃𝑖(𝑡)
} ), ({
𝒑𝑖(𝑡)
} , {
𝝓𝑖(𝑡)
} ), ({
𝐍𝑘
} , {
𝐃𝑘(𝑡)
} ),
where the size of each mapped map layer is𝐀𝑙𝑎𝑦𝑒𝑟 ∈ R𝑀×𝑀 and the map
layer 𝐀𝑙𝑎𝑦𝑒𝑟 can be stacked as a tensor of R𝑀×𝑀×𝑛 when each layer has
the same type.
Map centering and global-local map
The map layer 𝐀𝑙𝑎𝑦𝑒𝑟 ∈ R𝑀×𝑀×𝑛 is converted into a centered tensor
𝐁𝑙𝑎𝑦𝑒𝑟 ∈ R𝑀𝑐 ×𝑀𝑐 ×𝑛 with 𝑀𝑐 = 2𝑀 − 1. In the centered tensor 𝐁𝑙𝑎𝑦𝑒𝑟, the
original tensor 𝐀𝑙𝑎𝑦𝑒𝑟 is moved so that position of the agent is centered,
and the rest of the extended part of the centered tensor 𝐁𝑙𝑎𝑦𝑒𝑟 is filled
with the padding value 𝐱𝐩𝐚𝐝 ∈ R.
The tensor 𝐁𝑙𝑎𝑦𝑒𝑟 ∈ R𝑀𝑐 ×𝑀𝑐 ×𝑛 is used in two ways. In order to
create a local map, the centered tensor 𝐁𝑙𝑎𝑦𝑒𝑟 is cropped with cropping
parameter 𝑙. The local tensor 𝐂𝑙𝑎𝑦𝑒𝑟, which is the expression of the local
map, appears as 𝐂𝑙𝑎𝑦𝑒𝑟 ∈ R𝑙×𝑙×𝑛. For the global tensor 𝐃𝑙𝑎𝑦𝑒𝑟, which is
the expression of the global map, we use an average pooling algorithm
with pooling cell size 𝑔 to ignore the detailed level of distant features.
The global tensor 𝐃𝑙𝑎𝑦𝑒𝑟 is denoted by 𝐃𝑙𝑎𝑦𝑒𝑟 ∈ R
⌊ 𝑀𝑐
𝑔
⌋
×
⌊ 𝑀𝑐
𝑔
⌋
×𝑛
. As 𝑙
increases, the size of the local map increases, while as 𝑔 increases, the
pooling cell size increases, reducing the size of the global map.
4

===== PAGE 5 =====
M. Seong, O. Jo and K. Shin Engineering Applications of Artificial Intelligence 120 (2023) 105891
Fig. 2. The basic framework of RL.
Observation space 𝛺
Through the map processing, the observation space 𝜴, which is the
input space for the agent, is defined as
𝜴 = 𝜴𝑙
⏟ ⏟ ⏟
Local Map
× 𝜴𝑔
⏟ ⏟ ⏟
Global Map
× N⏟ ⏟ ⏟
Flying Time
, (19)
where the local map is
𝜴𝑙 = B𝑙×𝑙×1
⏟ ⏟ ⏟
𝐿𝑜𝑐𝑎𝑙
𝐸𝑛𝑣𝑖𝑟𝑜𝑛𝑚𝑒𝑛𝑡
× R𝑙×𝑙
⏟ ⏟ ⏟
𝐿𝑜𝑐𝑎𝑙
𝐷𝑎𝑡𝑎
× N𝑙×𝑙
⏟ ⏟ ⏟
𝐿𝑜𝑐𝑎𝑙
𝐹 𝑙𝑦𝑖𝑛𝑔 𝑡𝑖𝑚𝑒
× B𝑙×𝑙
⏟ ⏟ ⏟
𝐿𝑜𝑐𝑎𝑙
𝑂𝑝𝑒𝑟𝑎𝑡′ 𝑙 𝑠𝑡𝑎𝑡𝑢𝑠
, (20)
and the global map is
𝜴𝑔 = R ̃ 𝑔× ̃ 𝑔×1
⏟ ⏟ ⏟
𝐺𝑙𝑜𝑏𝑎𝑙
𝐸𝑛𝑣𝑖𝑟𝑜𝑛𝑚𝑒𝑛𝑡
× R ̃ 𝑔× ̃ 𝑔
⏟ ⏟ ⏟
𝐺𝑙𝑜𝑏𝑎𝑙
𝐷𝑎𝑡𝑎
× R ̃ 𝑔× ̃ 𝑔
⏟ ⏟ ⏟
𝐺𝑙𝑜𝑏𝑎𝑙
𝐹 𝑙𝑦𝑖𝑛𝑔 𝑡𝑖𝑚𝑒
× R ̃ 𝑔× ̃ 𝑔
⏟ ⏟ ⏟
𝐺𝑙𝑜𝑏𝑎𝑙
𝑂𝑝𝑒𝑟𝑎𝑡′ 𝑙 𝑠𝑡𝑎𝑡𝑢𝑠
, (21)
with ̃ 𝑔=
⌊ 𝑀𝑐
𝑔
⌋
. Observation space 𝑜𝑖(𝑡) ∈ 𝜴 is defined as a tuple
𝑜𝑖(𝑡) = ( 𝐌𝑙,𝑖(𝑡), 𝐃𝑙,𝑖(𝑡), 𝐁𝑙,𝑖(𝑡), Φ𝑙,𝑖(𝑡),
𝐌𝑔,𝑖(𝑡), 𝐃𝑔,𝑖(𝑡), 𝐁𝑔,𝑖(𝑡), Φ𝑔,𝑖(𝑡), 𝑏𝑖(𝑡)).
(22)
In an observation space tuple, 𝐌𝑙,𝑖(𝑡) is the local observation of
agent 𝑖 of the environment, 𝐃𝑙,𝑖(𝑡) is the local observation of the
residual data, 𝐁𝑙,𝑖(𝑡) is the local observation of the remaining flying
time, and Φ𝑙,𝑖(𝑡) is the local observation of the operational status.
𝐌𝑔,𝑖(𝑡), 𝐃𝑔,𝑖(𝑡), 𝐁𝑔,𝑖(𝑡), and Φ𝑔,𝑖(𝑡) are the respective global observations.
Note that surplus elements of the remaining flying time allow the agents
to understand their remaining flying time better.
As a result, we artificially transformed the POMDP to solve the
operational system problem we defined, which significantly reduces
the neural network’s size as proved in Theile et al. (2021), making the
training procedure feasible and reducing the training time.
4. Multi-Agent Reinforcement Learning (MARL) and transfer learn-
ing
Now we can formulate the RL as Dec-POMDP is depicted (see
Section 3.4). RL is a policy optimization process that selects an action𝑎𝑖
based on a policy 𝜋 in the current state 𝑠𝑖 and receives feedback called a
reward 𝑟𝑖 through interaction with the environment. At the same time,
it changes to the next state 𝑠′
𝑖. The basic framework for RL is shown in
Fig. 2. Note that, because of the way we defined Dec-POMDP, the state
that becomes the input space for the agent is an observation state 𝑜𝑖
observed by the agent, not the actual state 𝑠𝑖.
4.1. Double deep Q-learning
One of the promising algorithms in RL is Q-learning (Sutton and
Barto, 2018), which maximizes the cumulative discounted reward by
repeatedly carrying out the action 𝑎𝑖 in state 𝑠𝑖 until the end of the
episode. It is given by
𝑄(𝑠𝑖, 𝑎𝑖) = 𝑟(𝑠𝑖, 𝑎𝑖) + 𝛾𝑞
∑
𝑠′
𝑖 ∈𝑆
𝑝(𝑠𝑖, 𝑎𝑖, 𝑠′
𝑖)𝑄∗(𝑠′
𝑖, 𝑎′
𝑖). (23)
Note that 𝑠𝑖, 𝑎 𝑖 is the same as 𝑠𝑖(𝑡), 𝑎 𝑖(𝑡) as well as 𝑠′
𝑖, 𝑎 ′
𝑖 is the same
as 𝑠𝑖(𝑡 + 1), 𝑎 𝑖(𝑡 + 1) for ease of exposition. In (23), 𝑟(𝑠𝑖, 𝑎𝑖) represents
the immediate reward given to action 𝑎𝑖 in state 𝑠𝑖, 𝛾𝑞 ∈ [0 , 1] is the
discount factor, 𝑝(𝑠𝑖, 𝑎𝑖, 𝑠′
𝑖) is the transition probability to 𝑠′
𝑖 after action
𝑎𝑖 in the present state 𝑠𝑖, and 𝑄∗(𝑠′
𝑖, 𝑎′
𝑖) = max𝑄(𝑠′
𝑖, 𝑎′
𝑖) represents the
optimal Q-value of action 𝑎′
𝑖 in next state 𝑠′
𝑖. The Q-value, which is the
expected value of the sum of future rewards given the state 𝑠𝑖 and the
action 𝑎𝑖, is updated by the following formula:
𝑄(𝑠𝑖, 𝑎𝑖) ← (1 − 𝛼𝑞)𝑄(𝑠𝑖, 𝑎𝑖) + 𝛼𝑞×
⎡
⎢
⎢⎣
𝑟(𝑠𝑖, 𝑎𝑖) + 𝛾𝑞
∑
𝑠′
𝑖 ∈𝑆
𝑝(𝑠𝑖, 𝑎𝑖, 𝑠′
𝑖)𝑄∗(𝑠′
𝑖, 𝑎′
𝑖)
⎤
⎥
⎥⎦
,
(24)
where 𝛼𝑞 ∈ (0, 1] is the learning rate. As such, the optimal policy 𝜋∗ is
derived from
𝜋∗(𝑠𝑖) = 𝑎𝑟𝑔𝑚𝑎𝑥
𝑎𝑖∈𝐴
𝑄(𝑠𝑖, 𝑎𝑖). (25)
Q-learning is performed using a Q-table, where the rows and
columns consist of the action and state to calculate the Q-value. Q-
learning is computationally effective when the environment is simple.
But when the environment becomes more complex with a highly
extensible state space, it has difficulty converging because the Q-table
grows exponentially.
DQN was introduced to approximate the Q-table using deep neural
networks with weights 𝜃 (Mnih et al., 2015). The advantage of using
these approximations is that DQN will converge in complex environ-
ments, wherein neural networks show significant data efficiency in
generalization with experience replay and the target network. Expe-
rience replay allows networks to store transitions (𝑠𝑖, 𝑎𝑖, 𝑟𝑖, 𝑠′
𝑖) in the
experience replay memory 𝐃. During training, instead of deploying
only the current transition (𝑠𝑖, 𝑎𝑖, 𝑟𝑖, 𝑠′
𝑖), mini-batches of transitions are
chosen from the replay memory and used to train the network, which
leads to reducing the correlations in the sequence of training transitions
as well as preventing being driven to a local minimum. The target
network is a separate network that duplicates the original network
with weights 𝜃−. This network is updated at slower intervals than the
original network to stabilize the overall convergence of the network
during training. Then, the Q-network updates its weights to minimize
a loss function represented by the mean square error as such.
𝐿𝑖(𝜃) = E𝑠𝑖,𝑎𝑖,𝑟𝑖,𝑠′
𝑖 ∼𝐃
[
‖𝑦𝐷𝑄𝑁
𝑖 − 𝑄𝑖(𝑠𝑖, 𝑎𝑖; 𝜃)‖2
]
, (26)
where the target value is
𝑦𝐷𝑄𝑁
𝑖 = 𝑟𝑖(𝑠𝑖, 𝑎𝑖) + 𝛾𝑞max
𝑎′
𝑖 ∈𝐴𝑖
𝑄𝑖(𝑠′
𝑖, 𝑎′
𝑖; 𝜃−). (27)
The parameters of the target network 𝜃− are updated either simply
by means of a periodic copy of 𝜃 for each episode or a soft update for
each state transition after each update of 𝜃. As a method to update the
parameters of the target network 𝜃−, we used
𝜃− ← 𝜃𝜏 + 𝜃−(1 − 𝜏), (28)
where 𝜏 ∈ [0, 1] is an updating factor that adjusts the adaptation speed
and we choose 𝜏 to be 0.005 (Bayerlein et al., 2021).
The target value 𝑦𝐷𝑄𝑁
𝑖 is inevitably different from the optimal
value 𝑄∗ because the action of the next state 𝑎′
𝑖 is selected with the
target network parameter 𝜃− and then updated to the max value of
5

===== PAGE 6 =====
M. Seong, O. Jo and K. Shin Engineering Applications of Artificial Intelligence 120 (2023) 105891
𝑄𝑖(𝑠′
𝑖, 𝑎′
𝑖; 𝜃−) with the same target network parameter 𝜃−. The overesti-
mation problem occurs because the max calculation is performed twice
with the same parameter 𝜃−. Double-deep Q networks (DDQN), which
separate the parameters of the Q network when calculating the target
value 𝑦𝐷𝐷𝑄𝑁
𝑖 , was introduced in Van Hasselt et al. (2016). Finally, the
target value 𝑦𝐷𝐷𝑄𝑁
𝑖 is defined as
𝑦𝐷𝐷𝑄𝑁
𝑖 = 𝑟𝑖(𝑠𝑖, 𝑎𝑖)
+ 𝛾𝑞𝑄𝑖
(
𝑠′
𝑖, argmax
𝑎′
𝑖 ∈𝐴𝑖
𝑄𝑖(𝑠′
𝑖, 𝑎′
𝑖; 𝜃); 𝜃−
)
.
(29)
4.2. Multi-agent deep RL (MADRL) and transfer learning
There are a few approaches to address the challenge of optimizing
each agent’s policy control while considering the other agents in a
multi-agent environment. The best way to apply our learning approach
is decentralized deployment with knowledge transfer (Chen, 2019).
With this approach, agent execution occurs individually, which is the
decentralized selection of the policy. We chose all agents to train and
learn their policies on the same network and share parameters with the
other agents. Each agent’s experience acquired through decentralized
deployment is added to a common replay memory. During training, all
the agent’s experiences are optimized as mini-batches are chosen from
the replay memory, which leads to faster convergence.
As defined in (14), our agents cannot be characterized as fully coop-
erative because the central element of the reward function, which has
the same structure for each agent and is calculated with decentralized
execution, is based on charging and jointly collected data (Zhang et al.,
2021). Our setting is a simple cooperative where all the agents learn the
optimal cooperation policy.
Balancing the multiple objectives of data collection and charg-
ing can be much closer to having practical applications to the real
world (Dulac-Arnold et al., 2019). We found that simply adding individ-
ual components to the reward function was insufficient to achieve the
two main objectives effectively. The advantage of transfer learning for
agents is employed to learn how to balance multiple objectives effec-
tively (Punma, Unpublished results, 0000). When there is no transfer
learning in the first place, agents continue to collect data to receive
positive rewards even if they run down their batteries, which will
impose a sizeable negative reward in the near future. We use transfer
learning to get the agent to learn their policy divided into two stages. In
the first training, we set agents to not take into account running down
their battery, by removing the continuous battery decrease according
to the mission time slot. In the next training, we continuously decrease
their battery according to the mission time slot, while keeping all other
settings the same. Through transfer learning, agents could balance the
two objectives by charging when needed.
The detailed procedure for the transfer learning part of our algo-
rithm is presented in Algorithm 1. The reason why we test episodes
in lines 10–11 is that since various scenario parameters are included
together in the training process of one control policy, making only
a few evaluations may reduce the reliability of the evaluation due
to the presence of extreme cases. Therefore, a moving average of
periodic multiple evaluations and the model weight separately when
this updated value shows the best performance are accumulated. The
weights are loaded during the second training phase or evaluation
phase.
4.3. Complexity analysis
During the first and second training phases, the DRL agent observes
the environment where the states of POMDP are defined as input for the
DRL algorithm in Section 3.4. The agent utilizes its trained network to
carry out an action 𝒂𝑠
𝑖 (𝑡) which represents an actual direction. The total
computational complexity for the fully connected layers is computed
as the number of multiplications (Liu et al., 2019): 𝑂(∑𝐹
𝑓 =1 𝑛𝑓 ⋅ 𝑛𝑓 −1),
where 𝑛𝑓 is the number of neurons in fully-connected layer 𝑓.
Algorithm 1 Training and Evaluation process based on transfer
learning for the multiple objectives problem.
1: Initialize episode parameters.
2: Initialize experience replay memory 𝐃.
3: Initialize the weights of original network 𝜃 and that of target
network 𝜃−.
4: Fill replay memory with random action.
5: Step-I: First training phase
6: Set 𝜖 as 0.1.
7: Set decrement of the energy level of agent per step as 0.
8: for 𝑒𝑝𝑜𝑐ℎ 𝑒𝑝 = 0, 1, … do
9: Train episode.
10: if 𝑒𝑝%5 = 0 then
11: Test episode.
12: end if
13: if the best performance is achieved then
14: Save the model weights as 𝜃′.
15: end if
16: end for
17: Step-II: Second training phase
18: Set 𝜖 to ranging from 0.5 to 0.01.
19: Set decrement of the energy level of agent per step as −1.
20: Load the model weights as 𝜃′.
21: Repeat 8 − 16.
22: Step-III: Evaluation phase
23: Load the model weights as 𝜃′.
24: Hard update the target model weights as 𝜃′.
25: for 𝑒𝑝𝑜𝑐ℎ 𝑒𝑝 = 0, 1, …, 1000 do
26: Test episode.
27: end for
Table 2
Value ranges of the scenario parameters.
Scenario parameters Min Max
Number of deployed UAVs 1 3
Initial data volume to be collected 5.0 20.0
Maximum flying time 70 80
Charging start capacity 10% 50%
Charging complete capacity 60% 100%
Number of sensor nodes 5 25
5. Simulations
5.1. Settings
The simulation was implemented in Tensorflow 2.4.0 with a NVIDIA
Quadro RTX 4000 Graphics Processor and a 128 GB RAM. This UAV-
oriented data collection system was evaluated on a map that is dis-
cretized into 32 × 32 cells. At the beginning of each episode, scenario
parameters that determine the scenario are sampled randomly within a
predetermined range. The scenario parameters are as follows: number
of deployed UAVs, the initial amount of data to be collected from sensor
nodes, flying time available for UAVs at the start of each episode,
charging start capacity, charging complete capacity, number of sensor
nodes. The exact ranges of values from which the randomized scenario
parameters can be taken in Table 2.
The grid cell size 𝑐 is 800 m, and the constant altitude ℎ at which
the UAVs fly is 10 m. Each mission time slot contains four scheduled
communication time slots, that is, 𝑚 = 4 . Propagation parameters are
chosen in line with European Telecommunications Standards Institute
(ETSI) (2017), the rural macro scenario, with 𝛼𝐿𝑜𝑆 = 2.27 and 𝜎2
𝐿𝑜𝑆 = 2.
The network architecture of the proposed algorithm consists of
convolution layers that accommodate 𝐂𝑙𝑎𝑦𝑒𝑟 and 𝐃𝑙𝑎𝑦𝑒𝑟 as inputs with
ReLU activation that have a flattened layer that has three fully con-
nected hidden layers containing 256 neurons respectively and a fully
6

===== PAGE 7 =====
M. Seong, O. Jo and K. Shin Engineering Applications of Artificial Intelligence 120 (2023) 105891
Fig. 3. Comparisons of the training processes among the proposed algorithm and baseline algorithms. These curves include the average and 99% confidence interval line shown
through the exponential moving average. Note that the metrics are displayed with training steps equivalent to the number of epochs while training episode length is variable.
Table 3
Event reward structure.
Symbol Event Reward
𝛼 Data collection multiplier +1.3
𝛽 Collisions with other agents or boundaries −1.0
𝛾 Run out of energy −300.0
𝛿 While charging +0.05
𝜖 Communication quota is fulfilled +100.0
𝜁 Standard movement −0.1
connected layer of which the size of the output is 𝐀. The Q-values from
the last fully connected layer are used as an input observation through
the argument maximization policy while evaluating the agent and the
softmax policy when training the agent.
The environmental settings to implement the sensor nodes are as
follows. Since it is a sustainable system using charging, one episode
is set to end when the UAV energy level becomes empty or when a
communication quota is fulfilled. We set the predefined communication
quota 𝐔𝐶 as 440. The new data 𝐃𝑘,𝑛𝑒𝑤 allocated for each mission time
slot to each sensor node follows a Poisson distribution, where𝜆𝑝 = 0.02.
The sensor nodes are randomly scattered 5 to 25 different points for
each episode from the combination of 𝑥-axis coordinates (3, 8, 13,
18, 23) and y-coordinates (6, 11, 16, 21, 26). The values of the exact
parameters, as they appeared in (14), are shown in Table 3.
We use the following metrics to evaluate the agent’s performance
under different scenario instances. First, 𝑐𝑜𝑚𝑚𝑢𝑛𝑖𝑐𝑎𝑡𝑖𝑜𝑛 𝑓 𝑢𝑙𝑓 𝑖𝑙𝑙𝑚𝑒𝑛𝑡 is
the ratio of whether all agents have fulfilled their communication
quotas at the end of an episode. Second, 𝑐𝑜𝑙𝑙𝑒𝑐𝑡𝑖𝑜𝑛 𝑟𝑎𝑡𝑖𝑜 is the ra-
tio of data collected until the end of the episode to the total data,
which contains the data given to the sensor nodes at the begin-
ning of the episode and the continuously increasing data. Lastly,
𝑐𝑜𝑙𝑙𝑒𝑐𝑡𝑖𝑜𝑛 𝑟𝑎𝑡𝑖𝑜 𝑎𝑛𝑑 𝑐𝑜𝑚𝑚𝑢𝑛𝑖𝑐𝑎𝑡𝑖𝑜𝑛 is the product of 𝑐𝑜𝑚𝑚𝑢𝑛𝑖𝑐𝑎𝑡𝑖𝑜𝑛
𝑓 𝑢𝑙𝑓 𝑖𝑙𝑙𝑚𝑒𝑛𝑡 and 𝑐𝑜𝑙𝑙𝑒𝑐𝑡𝑖𝑜𝑛 𝑟𝑎𝑡𝑖𝑜 per episode.
5.2. DRL path planning based on transfer learning
To demonstrate that transfer learning and DDQN are essential to
achieving higher training performance, we compare the proposed algo-
rithm with two baseline algorithms. We first compare training processes
with and without transfer learning. When applying transfer learning,
𝜖 is tuned with e-greedy exploration starting at 0.5 and decaying to
0.01 in the second stage, as shown in Algorithm 1. The reason for
using decaying e-greedy exploration is that it was possible to meet
the multiple objectives of charging and data collection experimentally.
Furthermore, we compare the proposed algorithm with a conventional
algorithm, the DQN algorithm. The DQN algorithm applies transfer
learning in the same way as our proposed algorithm.
Fig. 3 depicts the cumulative reward and the collection ratio with
communication fulfillment metrics over the training step. These results
show performance improvements when the proposed algorithm is used.
In Fig. 3a, we can see that the proposed algorithm-based agent performs
better in the entire training steps. In Fig. 3b, it can be observed that a
curve to which the proposed algorithm is applied shows better perfor-
mance in the latter training steps. We could observe that the curves to
which the DQN baseline algorithm was applied already converge from
training step 1.0e5, whereas the curve to which the proposed algorithm
was applied outperforms in training step 2.0e5. This is because a pro-
posed algorithm-based agent has already been trained to collect data, so
the performance has risen more steeply while training communication
fulfillment through charging. This is significant in that the performance
when the proposed algorithm is applied to both metrics is better.
5.3. Visualization of simulation results
The scenario is presented based on the scenario parameter set
in 𝑆𝑒𝑡𝑡𝑖𝑛𝑔𝑠 (see Section 5.1.). Performance in the scenario is eval-
uated using Monte Carlo simulations over the defined full range of
scenario parameters. The overall average performance is shown in
Table 4. 5 𝑎𝑐𝑡𝑖𝑜𝑛𝑠 is the result of defining action space as the 𝐀 =
{𝑁𝑜𝑟𝑡ℎ, 𝐸𝑎𝑠𝑡, 𝑆𝑜𝑢𝑡ℎ, 𝑊 𝑒𝑠𝑡, 𝐻𝑜𝑣𝑒𝑟 }. On the other hand, 9 𝑎𝑐𝑡𝑖𝑜𝑛𝑠 is
the action space that we defined in Section 2.2. As the agents’ action
space expanded, the performance of our proposed algorithm improved
significantly. Given that successful communication can be achieved
through at least one charge, the agents show good communication
fulfillment performance. We believe that the collection ratio cannot be
100%, because there are random scenario parameters that include fly-
ing time, the number of deployed UAVs or sensor nodes, and charging
parameters, and an extreme combination of these could be selected,
e.g., the number of deployed UAVs could be one, or it could be set that
charging starts when the remaining capacity is 10%, or new data could
be incremented for each sensor node until the end of the episode.
In Fig. 4, three example scenarios describe how the path planning
was adapted as the number of deployed UAVs increased from 1 to 3. All
other scenario parameters remain fixed at the values described in Fig. 4.
The fixed scenario parameter values were set as the average value of
the defined full range of the scenario parameters.
7

===== PAGE 8 =====
M. Seong, O. Jo and K. Shin Engineering Applications of Artificial Intelligence 120 (2023) 105891
Fig. 4. Example trajectories for 32 × 32 map with charging start capacity = 30%, charging complete capacity = 80%, all sensor node with initial data volume = 12.5 and a
maximum flying time = 80 steps.
Table 4
Performance metrics averaged over 1000 random scenario Monte Carlo iterations.
Metric 5 𝑎𝑐𝑡𝑖𝑜𝑛𝑠 9 𝑎𝑐𝑡𝑖𝑜𝑛𝑠
Communication fulfillment 90.1% 90.0%
Collection ratio 79.8% 90.8%
Collection ratio and communication 71.9% 81.5%
Fig. 4a shows a single agent trying to collect as much data as
possible with one-time charging. The agent collects data while flying
over the entire range of the sensor nodes. We can observe that a single
agent has no choice but to ignore a few nodes because the sensor nodes
are too widely deployed for all of them to be covered. Interesting points
can be seen in Fig. 4b, where a second UAV is assigned. Unlike Fig. 4a,
it can be seen that two agents adapt the path planning to divide the
entire area covered by sensor nodes into two sectors, which can be
confirmed by the dramatic increase in the data collection ratio from
73.6% to 89.4% as well as the agents can reach each sensor node
at least two times. It can be seen that communication fulfillment has
declined from 96.6% to 93.3% as one more UAV is assigned. In Fig. 4c,
with the addition of the third UAV, the data collection ratio increased
to 93.1%. However, communication fulfillment decreased slightly due
to the large number of agents.
5.4. Effect of scenario parameters on performance and macro-level benefits
What we want to emphasize is the effective reduction of the training
time. As demonstrated in Bayerlein et al. (2021) and Theile et al.
(2021), the global-local map approach has reduced the required size of
the network enough for feasible learning. Also, training together with
various scenario parameters helps find the sweet spot for each scenario.
For example, in Fig. 4, it can be seen that Fig. 4c is the scenario closest
to the sweet spot when deciding how many UAVs should be deployed
with the other scenario parameters given. The performance for specific
parameters can be derived using the advantage of our approach derived
from learning the generalized path planning policy for various scenario
parameters.
Fig. 5 shows the effect on three metrics for each specific scenario
parameter. As demonstrated for the example trajectories shown in
Fig. 4, Fig. 5 shows that the performance is the best when the number of
agents is three. As the number of agents increases further, we observed
that the constantly generated data were collected well. In Fig. 5b, it
can be seen that the communication fulfillment is not lower than other
charging start capacities even when the charging start capacity, which
can be evaluated as adventurous in data collection, is 10%–20%. This
is because the agents have learned enough within the defined range
of scenario parameters. Similarly, in Fig. 5c, it can be seen that the
agents have learned well about all cases within the range of scenario
parameters. As shown in Fig. 5d, it is beneficial to allocate a large
amount of initial data per sensor node up to a range of [12.5, 15.0],
but it is negative that the initial data is allocated over the range.
Based on the reward structure (14), this is because there is less data
to collect before [12.5, 15.0], and after the range, the collection ratio
decreased because the data per sensor node becomes abundant. Fig. 5e
indicates that increasing the initial energy level for UAVs has a positive
relationship with the collection ratio and communication.
However, we observed that when a large amount of communication
quota was given in the multi-agent situation since the size of the
charging area is small, 4 × 4 cells, the probability of achieving a
communication fulfillment is reduced. In addition, the new data needs
to be set larger in 𝜆𝑝 for the agents to collect data continuously. As a
result, there is a complex relationship between the UAV flying time, the
communication quota, and the amount of new data.
After fixing the parameter value showing the best performance in
each scenario parameter range, it was confirmed as a result of 300
Monte Carlo iterations that the collection ratio and communication
was 92%, the communication fulfillment was 97%, and the collection
ratio was 95%. These values mean that the learning is carried out over
the entire range of scenario parameters at once, so we can effectively
check each parameter that performs optimally in the environment we
defined and how much the best performance is at that time. In other
words, sweet spots in the environment can be effectively found at the
macro-level.
5.5. Scaling to complicated environments
We adopted two more extensive environments to test whether each
agent performs effectively even in more general environments. The first
map is a 100 × 100 grid in which the number or locations of sensor
nodes vary for each episode. The sensor nodes are randomly scattered
36 to 49 for each episode. The maximum flying time is from 200 to
240, and 𝐔𝐶 is 1200. 𝛼 was changed from 1.3 to 0.2, considering that it
became difficult to harvest data due to the increased distance between
UAVs and sensor nodes in a 100 × 100 map. Other environmental
settings are the same as in Section 5.1. The second map is also a
100 × 100 where grid sensor nodes are randomly scattered 40 to 80 for
each episode. The most distinguishable difference from the first map is
that a start and charging zone is located in the center of the map. Other
environmental settings are the same as the first map.
In Figs. 6 and 7, example trajectories represent how the path
planning was adapted as the number of deployed UAVs increased from
1 to 3 in the extended maps. All other scenario parameters remain fixed
8

===== PAGE 9 =====
M. Seong, O. Jo and K. Shin Engineering Applications of Artificial Intelligence 120 (2023) 105891
Fig. 5. Effect on three metrics according to the scenario parameters. Each data point averages 300 Monte Carlo iterations for each scenario parameter space while maintaining
the parameters to be investigated.
Fig. 6. Example trajectories of the first extended map with charging start capacity = 30%, charging complete capacity = 80%, all sensor node with initial data volume = 12.5, a
maximum flying time = 220 steps and the number of sensor nodes = 42.
Fig. 7. Example trajectories of the second extended map with charging start capacity = 30%, charging complete capacity = 80%, all sensor node with initial data volume = 12.5,
a maximum flying time = 220 steps and the number of sensor nodes = 60.
at the values described in Figs. 6 and 7. The fixed scenario parameter
values were set as the average value of the defined full range of the
scenario parameters. Analogous to the trend of Fig. 4, Fig. 6 shows
that as the number of agents increases, communication fulfillment
decreases, and the data collection ratio increases. Also, Fig. 6c can be
a scenario closest to the sweet spot when deciding how many UAVs
should be deployed with the other scenario parameters given. However,
the entire data collection ratio dropped compared to Fig. 4 as the size
of the environment and the number of sensor nodes expanded. Fig. 7
also shows a similar trend to Fig. 4, but it is noteworthy that when the
number of agents was three, the communication fulfillment decreased
significantly to 64.9%. In the fixed scenario parameters in Fig. 7, we
could confirm that the sweet spot is when it is two agents.
Figs. 8 and 9 show the collection ratio and communication perfor-
mance with respect to the number of agents and sensor nodes in two
extended maps. We found that our proposed algorithm outperforms
the baseline algorithms in most cases. Even in expanded situations,
there were substantial performance improvements. Fig. 8a shows that
as the number of agents increases, the performance difference with
the baseline algorithms increases. Regardless of the number of sensor
nodes, the proposed scheme maintains outstanding performance above
0.22 in Fig. 8b.
In Fig. 9a, the proposed algorithm showed superior performance
with a difference of about 0.05 in the three agents situation except
when the number of agents was one. The trend in Fig. 7c, which showed
performance degradation when the number of agents was three, was
the same when the number of agents increased to three in Fig. 9a. In
Fig. 9b, while all the algorithms exhibited performance degradation
with the increasing number of sensor nodes, the proposed algorithm
showed superior performance on the entire range of the number of sen-
sor nodes. The proposed scheme confirmed performance improvements
9

===== PAGE 10 =====
M. Seong, O. Jo and K. Shin Engineering Applications of Artificial Intelligence 120 (2023) 105891
Fig. 8. Collection ratio and communication versus I and K in first extended map.
Fig. 9. Collection ratio and communication versus I and K in second extended map.
when extended to near-continuous environments for this multi-agent
system.
6. Conclusion and future work
We proposed a multi-agent deep reinforcement learning approach to
build a sustainable system that UAVs can achieve with data harvesting
from sensor nodes and charging when necessary. Through DDQN used
with various scenario parameters and global-local map processing, it
was confirmed that efficient learning was possible for agents in data
collection, charging, and path planning constraints. The results show
that the agents achieve balanced multiple objectives using a reward
function and transfer learning with a decaying e-greedy exploration
technique. When a specific environment is defined, it can be seen from
the results that it is possible to control the scenario parameters at a
macro level to show the best performance.
For future work, the learning objective needs to be extended to
collecting data considering the age of information collected from the
sensor node in non-grid 3D environments with policy-based algorithms
for continuous actions. It could be necessary to learn by including
even the altitude of the UAV in the action space using a deep de-
terministic policy gradient (DDPG) algorithm to implement non-grid
UAV movements. In non-grid environments with exponentially large
states, effective learning can be carried out with an attention mecha-
nism allowing each agent to learn the essential states by focusing on
areas needed to train. It would be considerable to give each agent a
unique network that makes an individual policy control operate in a
decentralized deployment and decentralized training.
CRediT authorship contribution statement
Mincheol Seong: Writing – original draft, Conceptualization, In-
vestigation. Ohyun Jo: Writing – review & editing, Conceptualization,
10

===== PAGE 11 =====
M. Seong, O. Jo and K. Shin Engineering Applications of Artificial Intelligence 120 (2023) 105891
Funding acquisition. Kyungseop Shin: Writing – review & editing,
Conceptualization, Funding acquisition.
Declaration of competing interest
The authors declare the following financial interests/personal re-
lationships which may be considered as potential competing inter-
ests: MinCheol Seong reports financial support was provided by The
National Research Foundation of Korea.
Data availability
The data that has been used is confidential.
Acknowledgments
This work was supported by the National Research Foundation of
Korea [grant number 2021R1F1A1064059].
References
Alkandari, A., Alabduljader, Y., Moein, S.M., et al., 2012. Water monitoring system us-
ing Wireless Sensor Network (WSN): Case study of Kuwait beaches. In: 2012 Second
International Conference on Digital Information Processing and Communications
(ICDIPC). IEEE, pp. 10–15. http://dx.doi.org/10.1109/ICDIPC.2012.6257270.
Bayerlein, H., Theile, M., Caccamo, M., Gesbert, D., 2020. UAV path planning for
wireless data harvesting: A deep reinforcement learning approach. In: GLOBECOM
2020-2020 IEEE Global Communications Conference. IEEE, pp. 1–6. http://dx.doi.
org/10.1109/GLOBECOM42002.2020.9322234.
Bayerlein, H., Theile, M., Caccamo, M., Gesbert, D., 2021. Multi-UAV path planning for
wireless data harvesting with deep reinforcement learning. IEEE Open J. Commun.
Soc. 2, 1171–1187. http://dx.doi.org/10.1109/OJCOMS.2021.3081996.
Bottarelli, L., Bicego, M., Blum, J., Farinelli, A., 2019. Orienteering-based informative
path planning for environmental monitoring. Eng. Appl. Artif. Intell. 77, 46–58.
http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.engappai.2018.09.015.
Chen, G., 2019. A new framework for multi-agent reinforcement learning–centralized
training and exploration with decentralized execution via policy distillation. http:
//dx.doi.org/10.48550/arXiv.1910.09152, arXiv preprint arXiv:1910.09152.
Dulac-Arnold, G., Mankowitz, D., Hester, T., 2019. Challenges of real-world rein-
forcement learning. http://dx.doi.org/10.1007/s10994-021-05961-4, arXiv preprint
arXiv:1904.12901.
European Telecommunications Standards Institute (ETSI), 2017. Study on channel
model for frequencies from 0.5 to 100GHz. (accessed May 2017) https://www.etsi.
org/deliver/etsi_tr/138900_138999/138901/14.00.00_60/tr_138901v140000p.pdf.
Fu, S., Tang, Y., Wu, Y., Zhang, N., Gu, H., Chen, C., Liu, M., 2021. Energy-efficient UAV
enabled data collection via wireless charging: A reinforcement learning approach.
IEEE Internet Things J. http://dx.doi.org/10.1109/JIOT.2021.3051370.
Kishk, M., Bader, A., Alouini, M.-S., 2020. Aerial base station deployment in 6G cellular
networks using tethered drones: The mobility and endurance tradeoff. IEEE Veh.
Technol. Mag. 15 (4), 103–111. http://dx.doi.org/10.1109/MVT.2020.3017885.
Lahmeri, M.-A., Kishk, M.A., Alouini, M.-S., 2021. Artificial intelligence for UAV-
enabled wireless networks: A survey. IEEE Open J. Commun. Soc. 2, 1015–1040.
http://dx.doi.org/10.1109/OJCOMS.2021.3075201.
Liu, C.H., Ma, X., Gao, X., Tang, J., 2019. Distributed energy-efficient multi-UAV
navigation for long-term communication coverage by deep reinforcement learning.
IEEE Trans. Mob. Comput. 19 (6), 1274–1285. http://dx.doi.org/10.1109/TMC.
2019.2908171.
Liu, K., Yang, Z., Li, M., Guo, Z., Guo, Y., Hong, F., Yang, X., He, Y., Feng, Y.,
Liu, Y., 2010. Oceansense: Monitoring the sea with wireless sensor networks. ACM
SIGMOBILE Mob. Comput. Commun. Rev. 14 (2), 7–9. http://dx.doi.org/10.1145/
1854219.1854223.
Mnih, V., Kavukcuoglu, K., Silver, D., Rusu, A.A., Veness, J., Bellemare, M.G.,
Graves, A., Riedmiller, M., Fidjeland, A.K., Ostrovski, G., et al., 2015. Human-
level control through deep reinforcement learning. Nature 518 (7540), 529–533.
http://dx.doi.org/10.1038/nature14236.
Oliehoek, F.A., Amato, C., 2016. A Concise Introduction To Decentralized POMDPs.
Springer-Verlag, Berlin.
Pérez-Carabaza, S., Scherer, J., Rinner, B., López-Orozco, J.A., Besada-Portas, E.,
2019. UAV trajectory optimization for Minimum Time Search with communication
constraints and collision avoidance. Eng. Appl. Artif. Intell. 85, 357–371. http:
//dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.engappai.2019.06.002.
Punma, C., 0000. Autonomous Vehicle Fleet Coordination With Deep Reinforcement
Learning, Unpublished results.
Shen, S., Han, Y., Wang, X., Wang, Y., 2019. Computation offloading with multiple
agents in edge-computing–supported IoT. ACM Trans. Sensor Netw. 16 (1), 1–27.
http://dx.doi.org/10.1145/3372025.
Skorobogatov, G., Barrado, C., Salamí, E., 2020. Multiple UAV systems: A survey.
Unmanned Syst. 8 (02), 149–169. http://dx.doi.org/10.1142/S2301385020500090.
Sutton, R.S., Barto, A.G., 2018. Reinforcement Learning: An Introduction. MIT Press,
Cambridge, MA.
Theile, M., Bayerlein, H., Nai, R., Gesbert, D., Caccamo, M., 2021. UAV path planning
using global and local map information with deep reinforcement learning. In: 2021
20th International Conference on Advanced Robotics (ICAR). IEEE, pp. 539–546.
http://dx.doi.org/10.1109/ICAR53236.2021.9659413.
Ullah, Z., Al-Turjman, F., Mostarda, L., 2020. Cognition in UAV-aided 5G and beyond
communications: A survey. IEEE Trans. Cogn. Commun. Netw. 6 (3), 872–891.
http://dx.doi.org/10.1109/TCCN.2020.2968311.
Van Hasselt, H., Guez, A., Silver, D., 2016. Deep reinforcement learning with double
q-learning. In: Proceedings of the AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence, Vol.
30. http://dx.doi.org/10.1609/aaai.v30i1.10295.
Zeng, Y., Wu, Q., Zhang, R., 2019. Accessing from the sky: A tutorial on UAV
communications for 5G and beyond. Proc. IEEE 107 (12), 2327–2375. http://dx.
doi.org/10.1109/JPROC.2019.2952892.
Zhang, Y., Aliya, B., Zhou, Y., You, I., Zhang, X., Pau, G., Collotta, M., 2018. Shortest
feasible paths with partial charging for battery-powered electric vehicles in smart
cities. Pervasive Mob. Comput. 50, 82–93. http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.pmcj.2018.
08.001.
Zhang, K., Yang, Z., Başar, T., 2021. Multi-agent reinforcement learning: A selective
overview of theories and algorithms. In: Handbook of Reinforcement Learning and
Control. Springer, pp. 321–384. http://dx.doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-60990-0_12.
Zhang, S., Zhang, H., Di, B., Song, L., 2019. Cellular UAV-to-X communications: Design
and optimization for multi-UAV networks. IEEE Trans. Wireless Commun. 18 (2),
1346–1359. http://dx.doi.org/10.1109/TWC.2019.2892131.
11