

===== PAGE 1 =====
 
Contents lists available at ScienceDirect
Engineering Applications of Artificial Intelligence
journal homepage: www.elsevier.com/locate/engappai  
Research paper
Asynchronous multithreading reinforcement learning with attention-based 
significance measurement for collision-free robot navigation
Chao Sun a
 , Jiang Wang a
 , Xing Wu b,∗, Chaoxu Mu a,c, Changyin Sun a,d,∗∗
a School of Artificial Intelligence, Anhui University, Hefei, 230601, Anhui, China
b College of Mechanical and Electrical Engineering, Nanjing University of Aeronautics and Astronautics, Nanjing, 210016, China
c School of Electrical Automation and Information Engineering, Tianjin University, Tianjin, 300192, China
d School of Automation, Southeast University, Nanjing, 210096, China
A R T I C L E  I N F O
Keywords:
Robotic vehicle
Reinforcement learning
Collision-free navigation
Significance measurement
Local attention
 A B S T R A C T
Collision avoidance is one crucial technique to achieve safe and efficient robotic vehicle navigation in 
unknown environments. However, moving obstacles with unpredictability in dynamic scenarios, usually 
increase the difficulty and complexity in collision avoidance of robotic vehicles. To enhance the stability of 
collision avoidance and boost its adaptability to uncertain dynamic scenes, a new attention-based significance 
measurement actor–critic (ASMAC) architecture is proposed. It is an end-to-end robot navigation model that 
uses imperfect local observation to directly plan precise collision-free motion commands. Firstly, a significance-
measured rollout replaybuffer (SMRR) is presented to categorize the experiences into different pools. It can 
prevent any overfitting or bias that may result from repeatedly sampling experience of a certain type during 
policy learning. Then, we enhance the traditional actor–critic network by integrating a multi-head local 
attention module to extract the local information at entity level. This way, the collision avoidance system 
can focus on key environmental features to compute more lightweight and respond more swiftly to dynamic 
changes in environment. Besides, a multi-step lookahead prediction (MLP) reward function is designed in the 
ASMAC-based reinforcement learning (RL) framework to prevent the generation of unnatural, intrusive, and 
short-sighted motion decisions. Finally, the asynchronous multithreading (AM) mechanism and proximal policy 
optimization (PPO) algorithm are extended to ASMAC model to offload the expensive online computation to an 
offline training process, enhancing the exploration efficiency in navigation policy learning of robotic vehicles. 
Extensive simulation and real-world physical experiments show that our method can generate time-efficient and 
collision-free guide paths in complex dynamic scenes, to successfully dodge collisions while moving towards 
the goal.
1. Introduction
Automated guided vehicle (AGV) is one typical industrial robotic 
vehicle utilized for repeated transportation tasks in factories for more 
than half of a century (Wu et al., 2020; Sun et al., 2022). With the wide 
application of AGV in disaster rescue, restaurant delivery, and house-
hold service, the collision avoidance methods have become increasingly 
important during AGV navigation. It plays a vital role in enabling 
AGVs to operate autonomously and safely in the environments. While 
there has been significant progress over the past decade (Sheng et al., 
2025; Zhang et al., 2024), safely and fully autonomous navigation 
is still challenging, especially in dynamic and uncertain workspaces 
cohabited by other moving objects, e.g., vehicles, pedestrians or other 
∗ Corresponding author.
∗∗ Corresponding author at: School of Artificial Intelligence, Anhui University, Hefei, 230601, Anhui, China.
E-mail addresses: 24064@ahu.edu.cn (C. Sun), wangjiang@stu.ahu.edu.cn (J. Wang), wustar5353@nuaa.edu.cn (X. Wu), cxmu@tju.edu.cn (C. Mu), 
cysun@ahu.edu.cn (C. Sun).
robots. The challenge usually arises due to the lack of knowledge of the 
navigation system about the intentions and strategies of other dynamic 
objects. To this end, the system endows AGV with the capabilities 
of collision risk assessment and robot-obstacle interaction, which are 
of great significance for AGVs to autonomously plan a collision-free 
path in complex dynamic scenes. Recently, some collision avoidance 
methods for AGV have been developed to avoid moving objects in 
dynamic scenes. According to task hierarchy, current collision-free 
navigation approaches can be divided into global and local approaches. 
The former is based on known obstacles map to generate continuous 
paths to avoid collisions (Xu et al., 2025; Shen et al., 2014). This 
process involves two crucial points. An environment map with obstacles 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.engappai.2026.113779
Received 14 July 2025; Received in revised form 1 January 2026; Accepted 6 January 2026
Engineering Applications of Artiϧcial Intelligence 167 (2026) 113779 
Available online 8 January 2026 
0952-1976/© 2026 Published by Elsevier Ltd. 

===== PAGE 2 =====
C. Sun et al.
Table 1
Summary of related works of collision-free navigation systems in complex dynamic scenes.
 Reference Proposed method Year Collision-free strategy Limitation
 Malone et al. (2017) SRS-APF 2017 Event prediction Geometric rule strategy: struggles to
handle highly dynamic scenarios
existing numerous moving
obstacles.
 
 Lin et al. (2025) TD-APF 2025 Space planning  
 Seo et al. (2020) FB-RA 2020 HJ formulation  
 Chen et al. (2018) BF-RA 2018 Barrier function  
 Poonganam et al. (2020) NPU-NMPC 2020 Probabilistic velocity Optimization searching strategy:
easily plunges into local minima. 
 
 Lee et al. (2020) FDE-DWA 2020 Finite distribution  
 Missura and Bennewitz (2019) PCA-DWA 2019 Predictive collision  
 Sheng et al. (2025) M-DQN 2025 Improved m-dqn
Reinforcement learning strategy:
depends heavily on the quality of
labeled data or demonstrations.
 
 Sun et al. (2024) AVCAC 2024 Value classification  
 Zhou et al. (2024) AL-DSAC 2024 Representation learning  
 Dong et al. (2024) TSG-AC 2024 Graph attention  
 Soares and Campos (2025) SL-MDE 2025 Self-supervised learning  
is first built offline/online via simultaneous localization and mapping 
(SLAM) technique, followed by planning collision-free trajectory with 
respect to the map for safe navigation. Yet, in a scene full of moving 
obstacles, SLAM may fail frequently because of noises or occlusions, 
resulting in the inability to generate reliable maps (Cheng et al., 2022).
To address the above issues, the local collision avoidance navigation 
techniques have been proposed recently. It is one kind of mapless 
navigation solution, in which AGVs typically utilize the real-time im-
perfect local sensing rather than prior knowledge to generate temporary 
avoidance paths for safe and efficient navigation (Guo et al., 2022; Fan 
et al., 2020). In this context, this group of techniques is more applicable 
to practical robotic application for collision-free navigation. Hence, this 
group of collision avoidance method is focused on this paper. Table 
1 summarizes the notable examples of local collision-free navigation 
systems that utilize mapless technique for accurate and safe collision 
avoidance in complex dynamic scenes.
According to the technical route, conventional mapless naviga-
tion methods can be divided into two strategies. One is the geo-
metric rule strategy. It simplifies the obstacles as convex bodies, fol-
lowed by computing the lower and upper boundaries of collision-free 
navigation path. The typical methods include artificial potential field 
(APF) (Huang et al., 2019; Lin et al., 2025) and reachability analysis 
(RA) (Seo et al., 2019; Pham and Pham, 2018). APF method and 
its variants rely primarily on the repulsive force engendered when 
approaching the obstacles to drive the AGV to dodge collisions. While 
APF-based solutions are efficient and easy to implement, many of them 
neglect future behavior of dynamic obstacles. It may cause troubles 
in AGV collision avoidance when the dynamic changes of moving 
obstacles are large. To alleviate this issue, Malone et al. (2017) enhance 
the APF with a Markov-based future event prediction module to assess 
collision threat, but leading to a high computational cost.
The RA is a reachable set-based obstacle avoidance solution, which 
is calculated by polar technique and Hamilton–Jacobi (HJ) formulation. 
It is a kind of target set that the robot in a certain initial state can 
safely reach through control in the presence of any disturbance. In Seo 
et al. (2020), a robust collision-free navigation approach is investigated 
by constructing the forward and backward reachable sets using HJ 
formulation. Chen et al. (2018) compute the reachable set using polar 
algorithm to achieve collision avoidance, in which the obstacle avoid-
ance set is defined as the complement of controlled invariant. While 
these solutions adopt Markov process approximation to decrease the 
runtime of probability computation for reachable sets, they struggle to 
handle highly dynamic scenarios existing numerous moving obstacles.
The second is path optimization searching technique. Many meth-
ods (Xiao et al., 2016; Poonganam et al., 2020) apply nonlinear model 
prediction control (NMPC) to avoid collisions. The NMPC can combine 
various constraints to gain optimal control and real-time operation in 
the process of collision avoidance. Yet, as the number of obstacles in-
creases, the vector dimension of constraint increases rapidly, which can 
decrease the performance of NMPC dramatically. In Lee et al. (2020), 
the dynamic window method (DWM) is used to gain the samples from 
velocity space of AGVs, followed by predicting its possible collision-
free motion trajectory via an objective function. Missura and Bennewitz 
(2019) improve the DWM to model moving object as a polygonal object 
with velocity, and compute future collisions. Nevertheless, these studies 
easily plunge into local minima, since DWM solely considers the AGV’s 
goal heading and lacks free-space connection information.
As artificial intelligence (AI) advances, many mapless navigation 
methods using reinforcement learning (RL) have gained attention. They 
map raw local observations to collision-free steering command di-
rectly (Sui et al., 2020; Kiumarsi et al., 2017; Everett et al., 2021). 
RL is one of machine learning algorithms, which can learn and op-
timize the navigation policy in a ‘‘trial and error’’ fashion, through 
interacting with the environments. Unlike conventional methods, it has 
a strong adaptability to model-free feature and complex system, which 
provides a new method to the collision-free navigation problem. In Lin 
et al. (2023), a transformer-based dual-channel self-attention term is 
proposed to endow AGVs with the ability to assess collision threats, 
thereby making collision avoidance decisions. The work (Sun et al., 
2024) introduces one attention-based value classification actor–critic 
architecture into RL objective to promote more informed navigation 
decisions. Wu et al. (2021) utilize grid-map image as state input to 
develop dynamic collision situations. However, the aforementioned 
studies only perform well in relatively simple and structured test en-
vironments. Hence, these RL-based navigation models are hard to 
generalize to complex and highly dynamic scenes.
To address this difficulty, a discrete soft actor–critic method that 
combines data replay and attention encoding is implemented to en-
hance the performance of RL (Zhou et al., 2024). In Song et al. (2024), 
Dong et al. (2024), researchers utilize the global information to guide 
the update of decentralized actor network in light of assuming that 
each robot is fully aware of the environment. This setting is suitable 
for handling small scene tasks. In real application, the field of view 
(FOV) of each AGV is limited by the sensing range of dominant sensor. 
Therefore, some researchers select raw sensor data (e.g., Lidar Xia 
et al., 2023 or Camera Soares and Campos, 2025) as input to design 
end-to-end RL patterns to realize robot collision avoidance in real 
scenes. The sensor-level techniques can deal with the variable obser-
vation dimension well, but introduce interpretability and large-size 
input problems. In addition, Godoy at al. Godoy et al. (2016) predict 
dynamic collision in advance by using Bayesian inference mechanism 
and calculate collision-free actions utilizing optimal reciprocal collision 
avoidance framework. Long et al. (2018) employ multi-scene multi-
stage training paradigm to estimate the state of moving obstacle for 
learning optimal policy. In Qureshi et al. (2021), scholar uses su-
pervised learning to teach AGV’s planning collision avoidance policy. 
Whereas the effectiveness in avoiding collision has been demonstrated 
through simulation test, the actual performance of this way depends 
heavily on the quality of labeled data or presentation. To sum up, 
current collision-free navigation methods still remain many limita-
tions, when operating in the imperfect sensing, large-scale search, and 
dynamic uncertain workspaces.
Engineering Applications of Artiϧcial Intelligence 167 (2026) 113779 
2 

===== PAGE 3 =====
C. Sun et al.
Fig. 1. AGV navigation with limited sensing in complex dynamic environ-
ments.
To address the problems mentioned above, a novel attention-based 
significance measurement actor–critic (ASMAC) collision avoidance 
method is presented in this paper. It is a model-free end-to-end robotic 
vehicle navigation method that can enable AGVs to navigate safely 
and efficiently in various dynamic scenes (see Fig.  1). Our major 
contributions are as follows:
• Unlike most existing synchronous RL-based obstacle avoidance 
solutions (Fan et al., 2020; Long et al., 2018; Liu et al., 2023), 
a novel RL approach that extends asynchronous multithreading 
mechanism and proximal policy optimization to the actor–critic 
paradigm is developed to learn optimal collision avoidance pol-
icy. This way can take full advantage of representation capabil-
ities of local observation information to offload the expensive 
online computation to an offline training procedure, thus ensur-
ing safe and efficient navigation of AGVs in dynamic uncertain 
scenarios.
• Different from using standard uniform replaybuffer in Everett 
et al. (2021), Dong et al. (2024), a significance-measured rollout 
replaybuffer is developed to enhance the sample utilization and 
mitigate the variance. Also, unlike existing interaction attention 
strategies in Dong et al. (2024), Liu et al. (2023), a new state 
encoder termed local attention module (LAM), is introduced to 
extract and encode entity-level local information. It can provide 
a more lightweight representation and capture collision-relevant 
environmental feature. Through the tight cooperation between 
rollout replaybuffer and state encoder, the navigation model can 
boost its perception capability and learning effectiveness, thus 
making safe and effective collision avoidance decisions rapidity.
• Unlike existing collision prediction tricks (Lin et al., 2025; Mis-
sura and Bennewitz, 2019; Liu et al., 2023; He et al., 2022) de-
ployed for collision avoidance, we innovatively propose a multi-
step lookahead prediction (MLP) reward function in RL system 
during the training phase to anticipate potential collision threat 
in advance. This prevents the navigation system from generating 
shortsighted, intrusive, and unnatural motion policies.
The remainder of this paper is organized as follows. The second 
section formulates the collision avoidance issue and introduces the 
AGV’s control model. A detailed discussion of our method is presented 
in the third section. The experiment procedure and results are shown in 
the fourth section. Finally, conclusions and recommendations for future 
research are given in the last section.
2. Problem formulation
From the perspective of RL, the collision avoidance navigation task 
can be modeled as a partially observable Markov decision problem 
(POMDP) (Oliehoek et al., 2016). Formally, the POMDP is described as 
a 6-tuple (, , ,  , 𝛺, ), where  is action space (𝒂 ∈ ),  is global 
state of environment (𝒔 ∈ ),  is the reward function (𝒓 ∈ ),   is the 
transition probability between states  (𝒔′ ∣ 𝒔, 𝒂), 𝛺 is observation space 
(𝒙 ∈ 𝛺), and  is observation distribution given the state (𝒙 ∼ (𝒔)).
In the process of collision avoidance task, the AGV leverages the 
navigation policy learned from its own limited local observations 𝒙𝑡 to 
execute the action 𝒂𝑡 at each timestep 𝑡. Then, the environment reward 
feedback is gained, and while the navigation system reaches the next 
state. The goal of this process is to drive AGVs to approach target 
autonomously and safely, which corresponds to learning an optimal 
collision-free policy that maximizes the expected return 𝐸, that is: 
𝐸 =
∞∑
𝑘=1
𝜆𝑘−1𝑟𝑡+𝑘 (1)
where 𝜆 ∈ [0 , 1] is the discount factor that can balance the long-term 
gain and short-term reward for the AGV.
It is noteworthy that the AGV tends to decelerate or accelerate 
abruptly during collision avoidance in real applications, since there is 
a sudden change between the expected velocity command 𝒂𝑡 output by 
the navigation policy 𝜋𝜃 and the current velocity 𝒗𝑡. This can cause the 
AGV to generate an unsmooth travel trajectory. Hence, a commonly-
used proportion integration differentiation (PID) control method is 
embedded into our navigation system as the underlying action control 
strategy. It enables the AGV to take advantage of the stability of 
classical control algorithm for final executable, smooth, and continuous 
trajectory traveling. In addition, this PID controller is the operations 
on the denormalized physical velocity after model training, which 
solely smooths transitions between explored actions, not RL’s action 
space itself. Hence, using PID controller does not limit RL policy’s 
ability to explore or learn fine-grained actions. On the contrary, it 
focuses exploration on physically meaningful action spaces. It can be 
formulated as: 
𝒂real
𝑡 = 𝒗𝑡 + 𝒖𝑡; 𝒖𝑡 = 𝐾𝑝𝒆𝑡 + 𝐾𝑖 ∫
𝑡
𝑡𝑠=0
𝒆𝑡𝑑𝑡 + 𝐾𝑑
𝑑𝒆𝑡
𝑑𝑡 ; 𝒆𝑡 = 𝒂𝑡 − 𝒗𝑡. (2)
where 𝑡𝑠 is the starting time, i.e., 𝑡𝑠 = 0 . 𝐾𝑝, 𝐾𝑖, and 𝐾𝑑 are the 
coefficients of proportion, integration and differentiation, respectively. 
In detail, the PID gains 𝐾𝑝, 𝐾𝑖, and 𝐾𝑑 are empirically set to 0.2, 
0.1, and 0.02, respectively, to match AGV’s physical constraints for 
ensuring PID output stays within hardware-feasible limits. In this way, 
the stability of AGV’s motion control can be prioritized to avoid intro-
ducing additional variability that could disrupt the RL policy’s learning 
process. 𝒂real
𝑡  is the real velocity after being processed by the PID 
controller, representing the ideal continuous velocity the AGV should 
follow. However, in the real-world, AGVs operate at discrete timestep, 
so the continuous velocity must be converted to a discrete-time signal 
for hardware execution. To this end, we exploit the Eq. (3) to build 
a discrete-time model to update the AGV’s self-state at each timestep. 
It directly aligns with AGV’s practical operation, i.e., sensor data is 
sampled at discrete intervals, and RL navigation model generates cor-
responding actions at the same timesteps. Specifically, AGV’s self-states 
(position and heading angle) at the next timestep are updated by: 
⎡
⎢
⎢⎣
𝑝𝑥
𝑡+1
𝑝𝑦
𝑡+1
𝛽𝑡+1
⎤
⎥
⎥⎦
=
⎡
⎢
⎢⎣
𝑝𝑥
𝑡
𝑝𝑦
𝑡
𝛽𝑡
⎤
⎥
⎥⎦
+
⎡
⎢
⎢⎣
cos 𝛽𝑡 ⋅ 𝑣𝑙
𝑡
sin 𝛽𝑡 ⋅ 𝑣𝑙
𝑡
𝑣𝑤
𝑡
⎤
⎥
⎥⎦
⋅ 𝛥𝑡 (3)
where 𝛽𝑡 is the AGV’s heading angle. 𝑝𝑥
𝑡  and 𝑝𝑦
𝑡 are the horizontal and 
vertical components of the AGV’s position 𝒑𝑡, respectively. 𝑣𝑙
𝑡 and 𝑣𝑤
𝑡  are 
the translational and rotational velocities respectively, i.e., 𝒂𝑡 = [𝑣𝑙
𝑡, 𝑣𝑤
𝑡 ].
3. Methodology
In view of real-time, safe and efficient navigation requirements 
under complex dynamic scenes, a new attention-based significance 
measurement actor–critic (ASMAC) collision avoidance system is built 
Engineering Applications of Artiϧcial Intelligence 167 (2026) 113779 
3 

===== PAGE 4 =====
C. Sun et al.
Fig. 2. The overall architecture of the attention-based significance measurement actor–critic (ASMAC) collision avoidance method.
to enable AGVs to make effective collision-free navigation decision. The 
overview architecture of our ASMAC method is shown in Fig.  2.
First, the AGV with imperfect perception navigates to its goal in a 
complex environment full of uncertain moving obstacles (e.g., pedestri-
ans). In the process of navigation, AGV interacts with the environments 
to summarize the experience information for generating rollout data 
and transferring them into the significance-measured rollout replay-
buffer (SMRR). Through the SMRR mechanism, these rollout data is 
partitioned and stored in different pools with fixed timestep sequence. 
This trick is much more practical and increase sample utilization ef-
fectively. Then, we design a local attention-based state encoder to 
extract and encode the critical environmental feature at the entity-
level. It can measure the relative importance of the surrounding (static 
and dynamic) obstacles to assist the AGV make better navigation 
decisions. Furthermore, the local encodings are sent into the ASMAC 
model, which make collision-free navigation decision by introducing 
PPO. Meanwhile, the AM mechanism is adopted for policy learning. 
Through extending PPO and AM to the ASMAC, the performance of 
robot collision avoidance is effectively improved.
3.1. ASMAC configuration
Formally, the POMDP described as a 6-tuple can be solved using the 
RL framework during collision-free navigation. Below, we discuss AS-
MAC’s configuration details, including observation space, action space, 
and reward function.
3.1.1. Observations
The information contained in observation space of an AGV includes 
preset prior data and measurement data from onboard sensors. In such 
case, AGVs cannot acquire the intents and states of other static and 
moving obstacles directly, but learns to make predictions and infer-
ences from limited local observations, and make its own near-optimal 
or optimal collision-free action decision. This local observation way is 
in accord with the real-world situation compare to prior methods (Long 
et al., 2018; Liu et al., 2023) using a fully observable situation, since 
it is difficult for physical AGVs to accurately perceive the position and 
velocity of nearby moving obstacles. The specific observation setting of 
the AGV at timestep 𝑡 is as follows: 
𝒙𝑡 = [𝒑𝑡, 𝒗𝑡, 𝒑𝑔
𝑡 , 𝛽𝑡, 𝒙other] (4)
where 𝒑𝑡 and 𝒗𝑡 are the global position and the velocity for the AGV, re-
spectively. 𝒑𝑔
𝑡  denotes the global position of target point. 𝛽𝑡 is the AGV’s 
heading angle. 𝒙other is an imperfect perception vector that integrates 
the position of (static and dynamic) obstacles observed in FOV of AGVs 
at timestep 𝑡. It is noteworthy that 𝒙𝑡 is a practical implementation of 
the POMDP’s observation space 𝛺, listing the specific sensor-derived 
features (a subset of the POMDP) the AGV uses to make decisions.
3.1.2. Actions
Since the AGV in our environment utilizes the differential-driving 
wheels, a natural choice of action space for the AGV is a translational 
and rotational velocity, i.e., 𝒂𝑡 = [𝑣𝑙
𝑡, 𝑣𝑤
𝑡 ]. In this work, the action space 
is continuously represented and is limited in a range of [𝑣min, 𝑣max]. 
Considering the real robot’s kinematic and real-world application, we 
scale the velocity range to [−1, 1] during the training phase. This is a 
standard RL practice to stabilize policy optimization. Moreover, we as-
sign goals to AGVs at each time step dynamically, which can allow the 
AGV to generate more flexible decisions. Also, it is noteworthy that this 
scaled output is not final velocity sent to AGV’s hardware, but rather 
one reverse scaling step is applied after training to map the normalized 
[−1,1] values back to AGV’s physical velocity ranges. Specifically, the 
reverse scaling step is formulated as: 𝑣𝑝ℎ𝑦𝑠𝑖𝑐𝑎𝑙 = 𝑣min,𝑛𝑎𝑡𝑖𝑣𝑒+(𝑣𝑠𝑐𝑎𝑙𝑒𝑑 +)∕2×(𝑣max,𝑛𝑎𝑡𝑖𝑣𝑒 − 𝑣min,𝑛𝑎𝑡𝑖𝑣𝑒
). Where the [𝑣min,𝑛𝑎𝑡𝑖𝑣𝑒, 𝑣max,𝑛𝑎𝑡𝑖𝑣𝑒
] is the AGV’s 
native output range, 𝑣𝑠𝑐𝑎𝑙𝑒𝑑 ∈ [−1, 1] is the scaled output, 𝑣𝑝ℎ𝑦𝑠𝑖𝑐𝑎𝑙 is 
the reverse scaling output, i.e., de-normalized velocity. Through this 
reverse scaling trick, it is possible to ensure that the actor–critic’s 
output aligns with the AGV’s hardware capabilities, eliminating any 
distortion of movements caused by training-specific normalization. In 
conclusion, scaling the actor–critic module’s translational/rotational 
velocity outputs to [−1,1] is a training-specific optimization that does 
not distort the AGV’s actual movements.
3.1.3. Rewards
The reward design directly determines whether the AGV can be 
guided effectively, so it plays a crucial role in the AGV to fulfill the 
task requirements. To make the AGV gain reward continuously, and 
avoid shortsighted and recklessness behaviors, we split the reward 
setting of the AGV into a MLP reward setting and a basic configura-
tion. It is noteworthy that we assume that AGV has integrated object 
detection module that can accurately identify the interaction obstacles. 
This module is the foundation for distinguishing static and dynamic 
obstacles. It classifies obstacles in the AGV’s field of view into two 
categories based on their motion state, i.e., static obstacles with no 
measurable motion across consecutive timestep and dynamic obstacles 
with detectable translational or rotational velocity.
Engineering Applications of Artiϧcial Intelligence 167 (2026) 113779 
4 

===== PAGE 5 =====
C. Sun et al.
Fig. 3. AGV in its FOV at timestep 𝑡 makes a multi-step trajectory prediction for moving obstacles (OBS), and executes multi-step uniform trajectory evolution 
on the basis of its current velocity. At each look-ahead step, AGV virtually invades the safety zone of moving obstacles or collides with it, while a specific penalty 
signal is produced. The magnitude of this penalty decays exponentially with as the look-ahead step 𝑘 increases.
The total reward configuration is shown as follows: 
𝑟𝑡 =
{
−1, if any(𝒅ASs) < 𝒅coll or any(𝒅ADs) < 𝒅coll.
−𝐹scale|𝑑𝑔
𝑡 | + 𝑟time + 𝑟MLP, otherwise.
(5)
where 𝒅ASs = [ 𝑑AS1 , 𝑑AS2 , … , 𝑑AS𝑚 ] denotes the Euclidean distance 
vector between the AGV and observed static obstacles {1, … , 𝑚} in 
its FOV. 𝒅ADs = [ 𝑑AD1 , 𝑑AD2 , … , 𝑑AD𝑛 ] is the relative distance vector 
between the AGV and other dynamic obstacles {1, … , 𝑛} in its FOV. 
𝒅coll is the collision distance threshold, which is empirically set to 
0.1 m for a moderate effect. When the AGV’s distance to any static 
obstacles (𝒅ASs) or dynamic obstacles (𝒅ADs) falls below the collision 
threshold 𝒅coll, the reward imposes a severe fixed penalty of −1. This 
penalty directly discourages unsafe behavior by reducing the policy’s 
expected return whenever collision risk is imminent, forcing the AGV 
to prioritize maintaining safe distances.
𝑑𝑔
𝑡 = ‖𝒑𝑔
𝑡 − 𝒑𝑡‖2 denotes the relative L2 distance between the target 
point and the AGV at timestep 𝑡. 𝐹scale = 1∕𝑅env is the scaling constant. 
𝑅env is the radius of the current scene. 𝑟time = −0 .01, given at each 
timestep, is a constant penalty. This term encourages the AGV to reach 
the goal as quickly as possible.
Inspired by Liu et al. (2023), we further design a prediction-based 
multi-step lookahead reward function 𝑟MLP to guide the AGV to learn a 
more reasonable and forward-looking collision-free motion policy in 
complex dynamic scenarios, handling unexpected situations such as 
sudden appearance of obstacles. As illustrated in Fig.  3, the MLP reward 
configuration between the AGV and 𝑗th dynamic obstacle is as follows:
𝑟
AD𝑗
MLP =
⎧
⎪
⎨
⎪⎩
−𝑒−𝑘, if min𝑘=1,…,𝐾 [𝑑𝑡+𝑘
𝐴′𝐷′
𝑗
] < 𝑑 com.
0, otherwise.
(6)
where 𝑑com = 0 .3 m is the comfort threshold of interaction distance 
between the AGV and a dynamic obstacle. Note that the 𝑑com = 0 .3 m 
is empirically determined and tied to specific environmental constraint. 
First, considering AGV’s physical size of 0.3 × 0 .3 m and maximum 
operation speed of 1.0 m/s, this 𝑑com can provide a 0.1 m safety margin 
beyond calculated stopping distances of 0.2 m. The effect in such case 
tends to ensure the AGV can avoid collisions even at maximum speed, 
preventing abrupt braking that would disrupt trajectory stability. Also, 
the objectives of this work are environments such as factory or labora-
tory, where the industrial AGV safety standards typically recommend 
0.2–0.5 m minimum distances to obstacles. Hence, 𝑑com = 0 .3 m 
falls within this range, gaining a trade-off between safety (avoiding 
crowding) and efficiency (preventing unnecessary detours). 𝑡 is the 
current timestep. 𝑑𝑡+𝑘
𝐴′𝐷′
𝑗
 represents the lookahead prediction distance 
vector between the AGV and the 𝑗th dynamic obstacle observed in its 
FOV. The final MLP reward for the AGV is the minimum of all 𝑑𝑡+𝑘
𝐴′𝐷′
𝑗
, 
where 𝑗 = {1 , … , 𝑛} is the index of dynamic obstacles that appear in 
the FOV of the AGVs. 
𝑟MLP = min
𝑗={1,2,…,𝑛}
𝑟
AD𝑗
MLP (7)
This penalty decays exponentially with the prediction steps 𝑘, mean-
ing an imminent collision is penalized more heavily. This way can 
discourage shortsighted, jerky maneuvers that might lead to future 
collision or uncomfortable interaction. Also, the effect in this case 
tends to ensure that faster dynamic obstacles (which reduce 𝑑𝑡+𝑘
𝐴′𝐷′
𝑗
more quickly), trigger stronger and earlier penalty, thus guiding policy 
to adjust velocity (e.g., slow down, turn) proactively. Note that we 
rely on two key-points to implement the MLP reward setting in our 
navigation system. The first one is to predict the trajectory evolution of 
moving obstacles in FOV at each timestep in the lookahead virtual time 
domain (LVTD), through exploiting a pre-trained trajectory prediction 
module, e.g., MID (Gu et al., 2022). Second, for the motion evolution 
of AGV in LVTD, we choose to perform a uniform AGV state update 
according to the current evaluated real action pair. This trick speeds 
up training process, allowing the system to focus on quantifying the 
policy reasonableness at the actual present timestep.
3.2. ASMAC description
The overall architecture of the ASMAC algorithm for AGV colli-
sion avoidance is illustrated in Fig.  2. In the subsequent sections, we 
elaborate on the implementation details of ASMAC, focusing on the 
SMRR mechanism, the local attention module, and the new collision-
avoidance actor–critic method.
3.2.1. Significance-measured rollout replaybuffer
In the training phase, the interaction experiences generated by a 
AGV need to be pushed into replaybuffer. Distinct from the previous 
approach (Everett et al., 2021; Dong et al., 2024) using prioritized 
experience replay (PER), a novel SMRR mechanism is designed in 
this work. It utilizes a dynamically-weighted multi-factor significance 
metric that fuses two complementary potentials, i.e., absolute reward 
and temporal difference (TD) error. The effect in this way tends to elim-
inate unreliable early-stage TD errors, and address the PER’s limitation 
of over-relying on a single and static signal. Furthermore, the SMRR 
Engineering Applications of Artiϧcial Intelligence 167 (2026) 113779 
5 

===== PAGE 6 =====
C. Sun et al.
Fig. 4. The structure of significance-measured rollout replaybuffer.
partitions experience sample and store them into different sub-replay 
pools instead of a single pool, based on their significances. By doing 
so, this replaybuffer can more frequently rollout the time-efficient and 
high-significance sample, preventing navigation model from overfitting 
and facilitates policy learning. The detailed process is as follows.
First, we design a significance measurement standard for classifying 
experience samples reasonably. The temporal difference (TD) error 𝛿
is mostly used for estimating the current state significance in RL. The 
magnitude of TD-error reflects the extent to which the AGV is able to 
learn from experiences. There is a great opportunity for improvement 
towards the expected action, when a larger |𝛿| value, since the AGV 
can timely examine the learning effectiveness of current policy through 
replaying this type of high-value data. However, the immature policy 
model at the early stage of training has limited environment explo-
ration, which may introduce a large |𝛿| at the edge of the state space 
to change the convergence direction of network. Compared with 𝛿, the 
reward 𝑟 can directly provide feedback on the quality of the current 
action taken. In the short term, the samples with high reward value 
have higher learning significance in the early stage of training, which 
can promote the AGV to quickly learn the collision-free navigation 
policy in the early stage. Thus, this work builds a new significance 
measurement method by fusing 𝛿 and 𝑟. It is formulated as: 
𝑆𝑀𝑗 = 𝛼|𝑟𝑗 | + (1 − 𝛼)|𝛿𝑗 | (8)
where 𝑆𝑀𝑗 is the measured significance value of the 𝑗th sample. |𝑟𝑗 |
is the absolute value of the reward for sample 𝑗. 𝛼 is the weight of |𝑟𝑗 |. 
|𝛿𝑗 | is the absolute value of the TD error of sample 𝑗. 𝛼 is dynamically 
updated with the training process. The value of 𝛼 is first set to 1 in 
the early stages of training, which can leverage the reward to guide 
the AGV to learn a collision avoidance policy quickly. With the further 
training of the model, 𝛼 gradually decreases to increase the weight of 
|𝛿𝑗 | to better guide the policy update through the TD error.
Once the significance of experience samples has been measured, 
they are partitioned and stored in distinct sub-replay pools. As Fig. 
4 shows, the SMRR comprises three sub-replay pools: B1, which is 
designated for storing high-value (significance) samples; B2, intended 
for recent samples; and B3, utilized for ordinary samples. Each of 
these sub-replay pools employs a last-in-first-out queue as its storage 
container and has a predetermined capacity. When the queue reaches 
its maximum limit, the oldest samples are removed from the head of the 
queue. The following are the detailed construction steps of the SMRR.
Step 1 (Initialization): The average value 𝑆𝑀𝑚 of all samples 
in the two sub-replay pools B1 and B3 is set to 0, while the weight 
coefficient 𝛼 of the reward is set to 1. In the process of model training, 
each sample generated is added to the end of queue B2 in turn. When 
B2 reaches its capacity limit, the oldest sample (𝒙𝑖, 𝒂𝑖, 𝑟𝑖, 𝒙𝑖+1, Done) is 
ejected from the head of B2 and the value of the ejected sample is 
calculated as 𝑆𝑀𝑖. If 𝑆𝑀𝑖 is higher than 𝑆𝑀𝑚, the ejected sample is 
added to B1, and otherwise stored in B3. Once the storage of all sub-
replay pools is completed, the 𝑆𝑀𝑚 and 𝛼 are updated, and the above 
process is repeated until the end of the training.
Step 2 (Stratification Sampling): In order to ensure both timeli-
ness and diversity of samples in RL, the stratification sampling strategy 
is devised in this work to randomly extract appropriate samples from 
sub-replay pools B1, B2 and B3. This way can create a balanced 
and representative minibatch for model training. We record the total 
number of the minibatch as 𝑁 (1024 herein), including 𝑁1 samples in 
B1, 𝑁2 samples in B2, and 𝑁3 samples in B3, that is: 
𝑁 = 𝑁1 + 𝑁2 + 𝑁3 (9)
where 𝑁2 is set as a fixed value to ensure that each batch sampling can 
always contain recent samples. This is important because recent expe-
riences often provide valuable information about the current dynamics 
of the environment. Including them in the training process can help the 
RL model adapt and update its weights to reflect the most up-to-date 
knowledge. It is worth noting that 𝑁1 is set to a large value initially, 
which means that a large number of high-value samples are selected in 
the early stages of training. The effect in such a case tends to encourage 
the network to converge in the right direction by emphasizing the 
most valuable experience. With the progress of policy learning, whereas 
the performance of the AGV collision avoidance becomes more and 
more excellent, the occurrence frequency of high-value samples tends 
to increase. To avoid overfitting with respect to high-value samples, 
we properly reduce 𝑁1 and increase 𝑁3 as training progresses. This 
adjustment can make the minibatch more balanced to boost the model 
generalization.
3.2.2. Local attention module design
The local observation within limited FOV of AGV encompass diverse 
information that is clearly of different importance to it. Hence, the local 
attention module is an essential component of ASMAC, which learns 
weighted local encodings to help AGVs focus on the key features of 
local observations. As shown in Fig.  2, the multi-head local attention 
mechanism (LAM) is introduced into this module to compute indepen-
dent attention weights for same input sequences, which can enable the 
AGVs to rapidly prioritize critical and changed environmental features. 
This is a core advantage over traditional methods (Seo et al., 2019; 
Pham and Pham, 2018) that handle all observation results equally, 
leading to delay or misfocus. Also, unlike existing interaction graph 
attention-based methods (Dong et al., 2024; Liu et al., 2023) treating 
environment observation as a set of unstructured tokens (e.g., grid cell, 
LiDAR points), this LAM can explicitly categorize observations into dis-
tinct entity classes, and process each class with dedicated pre-encoding 
network. It can ensure that the attention is focused on semantically 
meaningful entities rather than raw, unclassified data, thus capturing 
critical information of the environment effectively. Furthermore, dis-
tinct from using global attention in Song et al. (2024) requiring weight 
calculation with pairwise token interactions, this LAM uses dense syn-
thesizer attention mechanism to compute weight, which can greatly 
reduce computation complexity and preserve key feature extraction. 
This way lays an important basis for subsequent real-time collision-free 
robot navigation by using the on-board CPU system for various dynamic 
scenes. The detailed process is as follows.
The encoding process in this work can be divided into two stages: 
the pre-encoding stage and the attention encoding stage. To focus on 
distinguishing and handling different categories of obstacles (entities), 
we set up individual pre-encoding networks for each entity class in 
ASMAC. Each pre-encoding network consists of a LayerNorm Layer, 
a fully connected network (Embedding layer) and a leaky ReLU. The 
specific process of the pre-encoding stage is as follows.
Engineering Applications of Artiϧcial Intelligence 167 (2026) 113779 
6 

===== PAGE 7 =====
C. Sun et al.
First, the pre-encoding of AGV self is achieved by using the opera-
tion in Eq. (10), that is: 
𝒆𝑠𝑒𝑙𝑓 = 𝑓𝑠𝑒𝑙𝑓 (𝒙𝑠𝑒𝑙𝑓 ) (10)
where 𝑓𝑠𝑒𝑙𝑓 is the self pre-encoding network, and 𝒙𝑠𝑒𝑙𝑓 denotes the 
information vector of the AGV itself (including self-global velocity and 
position).
Then, the entity information in the local observation 𝒙 of AGV is 
pre-encoded as: 
𝒆𝑐1
𝑒𝑛𝑡𝑖𝑡𝑦 = 𝑓 𝑐1
𝑒𝑛𝑡𝑖𝑡𝑦(𝒐𝑐1
𝑒𝑛𝑡𝑖𝑡𝑦)
𝒆𝑐2
𝑒𝑛𝑡𝑖𝑡𝑦 = 𝑓 𝑐2
𝑒𝑛𝑡𝑖𝑡𝑦(𝒐𝑐2
𝑒𝑛𝑡𝑖𝑡𝑦)
⋮
𝒆𝑐𝑚
𝑒𝑛𝑡𝑖𝑡𝑦 = 𝑓 𝑐𝑚
𝑒𝑛𝑡𝑖𝑡𝑦(𝒐𝑐𝑚
𝑒𝑛𝑡𝑖𝑡𝑦)
(11)
where 𝑐𝑚 (𝑚 = 1 , 2, … , 𝑀) denotes the various types of entity class. 
In our robot collision avoidance scenes, the different types of entity 
classes contain target landmarks, static and dynamic obstacles, and 
other robots. Note that the separate pre-encoding networks process 
only relevant data for each entity class instead of raw sensor inputs. 
The effect in this way can reduce computational overhead, ensuring 
the LAM outputs attention weights quickly enough to react to sudden 
changes.
For each entity class, the number observed by the AGV is different. 
𝒐𝑐𝑚
𝑒𝑛𝑡𝑖𝑡𝑦 = [ 𝑜𝑐𝑚
𝑒𝑛𝑡𝑖𝑡𝑦1
, 𝑜𝑐𝑚
𝑒𝑛𝑡𝑖𝑡𝑦2
, … , 𝑜𝑐𝑚
𝑒𝑛𝑡𝑖𝑡𝑦𝑘
], 𝑘 ≤ 𝑁𝑚 is the number of entities of 
class 𝑐𝑚 in the FOV for the AGV. For ensuring constant-sized inputs, 𝑁𝑚
is set to 15 herein, which represents the default number of entities of 
class 𝑐𝑚 that the AGV can observe. If the number of entities of class 
𝑐𝑚 observed by the AGV is less than 𝑁𝑚, the space-occupying zero 
fill vector is used instead. 𝑜𝑐𝑚
entity𝑘
 represents the information vector for 
the 𝑘th entity in class 𝑐𝑚. 𝑓 𝑐1
𝑒𝑛𝑡𝑖𝑡𝑦, 𝑓 𝑐2
𝑒𝑛𝑡𝑖𝑡𝑦, … , 𝑓 𝑐𝑚
𝑒𝑛𝑡𝑖𝑡𝑦 are the pre-encoding 
networks of other entity classes. Thus, through the encoding module, 
the critical information of the environment can be effectively extracted, 
while keeping the encoding dimension for the complex dynamic scene 
constant.
Then, the attention encoding module is used to acquire the local 
encoding 𝑬atten
entity for the AGV. The attention encoding module contains 
three attention matrices: value matrix 𝑾 𝑒𝑛𝑡𝑖𝑡𝑦
𝑣 , key matrix 𝑾 𝑒𝑛𝑡𝑖𝑡𝑦
𝑘 , and 
query matrix 𝑾 𝑠𝑒𝑙𝑓
𝑞 . Similar to the pre-encoding networks, each type 
of entity is equipped with an individual key matrix and value matrix. 
However, because we only need to measure the contribution of these 
entities to AGV decision-making, the AGV itself is only equipped with 
the query matrix, in order to reduce the computation. The pre-encoding 
is mapped through the attention matrix, as below: 
𝑸 = 𝑾 𝑠𝑒𝑙𝑓
𝑞 𝒆𝑠𝑒𝑙𝑓
𝑲 𝑀
𝑒𝑛𝑡𝑖𝑡𝑦 = 𝑾 𝑒𝑛𝑡𝑖𝑡𝑦
𝑘 𝑬𝑀
𝑒𝑛𝑡𝑖𝑡𝑦
𝑽 𝑀
𝑒𝑛𝑡𝑖𝑡𝑦 = 𝑾 𝑒𝑛𝑡𝑖𝑡𝑦
𝑣 𝑬𝑀
𝑒𝑛𝑡𝑖𝑡𝑦
(12)
where 𝑬𝑀
𝑒𝑛𝑡𝑖𝑡𝑦 = [ 𝒆𝑐1
𝑒𝑛𝑡𝑖𝑡𝑦, 𝒆𝑐2
𝑒𝑛𝑡𝑖𝑡𝑦, … , 𝒆𝑐𝑀
𝑒𝑛𝑡𝑖𝑡𝑦] denotes the pre-encoding set 
of the various entities for the AGV. Finally, the local encoding 𝑬atten
entity
is obtained by dot product weighting, i.e., Eq. (13). It integrates only 
the critical environmental information and is input to the actor–critic 
networks to generate collision-free motion commands. 
𝑬𝑎𝑡𝑡𝑒𝑛
𝑒𝑛𝑡𝑖𝑡𝑦 = 𝜶𝑒𝑛𝑡𝑖𝑡𝑦 ⋅ 𝑽 𝑀
𝑒𝑛𝑡𝑖𝑡𝑦 (13)
where the attention weight 𝜶𝑒𝑛𝑡𝑖𝑡𝑦 measures the correlation between 
various types of pre-encoding 𝑬𝑀
𝑒𝑛𝑡𝑖𝑡𝑦 and the AGV, generating the final 
local feature encoding for the actor–critic network. Herein, 𝜶𝑒𝑛𝑡𝑖𝑡𝑦 is 
calculated by a dense synthesizer attention mechanism, that is: 
𝜶𝑒𝑛𝑡𝑖𝑡𝑦 = Sof tmax(𝑭 (𝑸 ⋅ [𝑲 𝑀
𝑒𝑛𝑡𝑖𝑡𝑦]𝑇 )) (14)
where the structure solely utilizes a two-layer fully connected network 
𝑭 and Softmax to calculate the attention weights. Specifically, 𝑸 ⋅[
𝑲 𝑀
𝑒𝑛𝑡𝑖𝑡𝑦
]𝑇
 computes the raw correlation between the AGV’s query and 
each entity’s key. 𝑭 (⋅) nonlinearly models the importance of each 
correlation, enabling the navigation model to learn task-specific at-
tention patterns. Sof t max (⋅) normalizes the output of 𝑭 (⋅) to ensure 
the sum of weights for all entities is 1, converting correlation scores 
into interpretable attention weights. This way helps the model quickly 
learn important information from the local observations and does not 
require interaction between tokens (common in global attention Song 
et al., 2024). Thus, through the local attention module, the AGVs 
can better evaluate the critical information of the local observation 
and make more accurate collision-free navigation decisions. Also, it is 
noteworthy that the local attention module in this work is trained im-
plicitly through the overall reinforcement learning objective, not with 
an explicit auxiliary reward for attention. Hence, this local attention 
module does not have a separate attention reward equation.
3.2.3. New collision-avoidance actor–critic method
The existing actor–critic method for collision avoidance navigation 
faces many problems, e.g., unstable update performance, low general-
ization ability, and weak exploration efficiency. To address these issues, 
the PPO and AM are extended to the navigation system to further 
enhance the ASMAC model.
With the integration of PPO, the AGV gains an extra reward propor-
tional to policy entropy at each timestep. This changes the optimization 
objective to: 
arg max
𝜋
E(𝒙𝑡,𝒂𝑡)∼𝜋
[ 𝑇∑
𝑡=0
𝜆𝑡(𝑟(𝒙𝑡, 𝒂𝑡) + 𝜂𝐻 (𝜋(𝒂𝑡|𝒙𝑡)))
]
(15)
where 𝜂 is a temperature coefficient that is used to make a trade-
off between maximizing policy entropy and maximizing reward. The 
policy entropy, 𝐻(𝜋(𝒂𝑡|𝒙𝑡)) = − log 𝜋(𝒂𝑡|𝒙𝑡), can measure the policy ran-
domness and make the algorithm more generalizable and robust. The 
optimization term, arg max𝜋 E(𝒙𝑡,𝒂𝑡)∼𝜋
∑𝑇
𝑡=0 𝜆𝑡𝑟(𝒙𝑡, 𝒂𝑡), is used to maxi-
mize environmental reward. Through maximizing policy entropy, the 
approach enhances the exploration ability of the navigation policy and 
possesses stronger robustness and generalization.
The optimization goal is achieved by PPO training paradigm, and 
the detailed process is shown in Fig.  2. The PPO is an actor–critic 
method based stochastic policy gradient. It introduces importance sam-
pling trick (He et al., 2022) to separate the target policy from the 
sampling policy for estimating policy gradient. In this way, the estima-
tion of policy gradient for PPO in an on-policy manner can be changed 
to an off-policy mode. Specifically, when the off-policy importance sam-
pling strategy is used for gradient calculation, the objective function for 
the PPO’s actor network can be formulated as follows: 
clip(𝜃) = ̂E𝑡
[min(𝑟𝑡(𝜃), clip(𝑟𝑡(𝜃), 1 − 𝜖, 1 + 𝜖)) ̂𝐴𝑡
] (16)
where 𝑟𝑡(𝜃) = 𝜋𝜃(𝒂𝑡|𝑬𝑎𝑡𝑡𝑒𝑛
𝑒𝑛𝑡𝑖𝑡𝑦,𝑡)∕𝜋𝜃𝑝𝑟𝑖𝑜𝑟 (𝒂𝑡|𝑬𝑎𝑡𝑡𝑒𝑛
𝑒𝑛𝑡𝑖𝑡𝑦,𝑡) is the ratio between the 
probability of an action under the current policy 𝜋𝜃(𝒂𝑡|𝑬𝑎𝑡𝑡𝑒𝑛
𝑒𝑛𝑡𝑖𝑡𝑦,𝑡) and the 
probability of an action under the prior policy 𝜋𝜃𝑝𝑟𝑖𝑜𝑟 (𝒂𝑡|𝑬𝑎𝑡𝑡𝑒𝑛
𝑒𝑛𝑡𝑖𝑡𝑦,𝑡). In the 
process of updating parameters, the policy setting of PPO is divided into 
one prior (behavior) policy 𝜋𝜃𝑝𝑟𝑖𝑜𝑟 and one current (target) policy 𝜋𝜃. The 
𝜋𝜃𝑝𝑟𝑖𝑜𝑟 is exploited to interact with the environments for collecting the 
training samples, while the 𝜋𝜃 performs parameter optimization based 
on sampled data from 𝜋𝜃𝑝𝑟𝑖𝑜𝑟 to generate optimal action commands. 
In this case it means that the learning is from data ‘‘off’’ the target 
policy, and the overall process is termed off-policy learning. The benefit 
of this off-policy learning lies in that the target policy parameter can 
be updated several times based on the sampled data from 𝜋𝜃𝑝𝑟𝑖𝑜𝑟 for 
efficient decision-making. In this perspective, this off-policy learning 
for the PPO method can make sampled data reusable, thus offloading 
the expensive online computation to an offline training procedure. 
Besides, a clip mechanism is introduced by OpenAI (Schulman et al., 
2017) to limit the change of 𝑟𝑡(𝜃) in a range between 1 - 𝜖 and 1 
+ 𝜖, where 𝜖 is the hyper-parameter belonging to [0, 1]. By doing so, 
the distributions of 𝜃 and 𝜃𝑝𝑟𝑖𝑜𝑟 differing too much can be avoided 
Engineering Applications of Artiϧcial Intelligence 167 (2026) 113779 
7 

===== PAGE 8 =====
C. Sun et al.
while preventing the gradient from taking an excessive step size. The 
reason behind this design is that too large step size for the gradient 
may introduce a big learning rate that would produce problem with 
convergence difficulty. ̂𝐴𝑡 represents the estimated advantage at the 
time-step 𝑡, which is calculated using the generalized advantage es-
timation (GAE) technique (Schulman et al., 2018). GAE exploits an 
exponentially weighted average to acquire a good trade-off in terms 
of the deviation and the variance. It is formulated as: 
̂𝐴𝑡 =
∞∑
𝑙=0
(𝛾𝜆)𝑙
[
𝛾𝑉 𝜔(𝑬𝑎𝑡𝑡𝑒𝑛
𝑒𝑛𝑡𝑖𝑡𝑦,𝑡+𝑙+1) − 𝑉𝜔(𝑬𝑎𝑡𝑡𝑒𝑛
𝑒𝑛𝑡𝑖𝑡𝑦,𝑡+𝑙) + 𝑟𝑡+𝑙
]
(17)
where 𝑉𝜔(𝑬𝑎𝑡𝑡𝑒𝑛
𝑒𝑛𝑡𝑖𝑡𝑦,𝑡+𝑙) used as a baseline to estimate the advantage is a 
state-value function on parameter 𝜔. 𝜆 and 𝛾 are two hyperparameters 
that can be utilized to control the magnitude of the variance, 𝑟𝑡+𝑙 is the 
reward value at time-step 𝑡 + 𝑙.
The critic network is an approximation function of baseline
𝑉𝜔(𝑬𝑎𝑡𝑡𝑒𝑛
𝑒𝑛𝑡𝑖𝑡𝑦,𝑡+𝑙). The calculation process of the mean square error loss is 
as follows: 
𝑣(𝜔) = −
𝑇∑
𝑡=1
(
∑
𝑡′>𝑡
𝛾 𝑡′−𝑡𝑟𝑡′ − 𝑉𝜔(𝑬𝑎𝑡𝑡𝑒𝑛
𝑒𝑛𝑡𝑖𝑡𝑦,𝑡)
)2
(18)
It is noteworthy that the parameter 𝜃 and 𝜔 are updated in each 
epoch with learning rate 𝑙𝑟𝜃 and 𝑙𝑟𝜔, respectively, based on the Adam 
optimizer (Adam et al., 2014).
To facilitate the overall learning efficiency, the AM mechanism
(Mnih et al., 2016) is adopted for policy learning. As shown in Fig.  2, 
the entire architecture consists of a global PPO and several independent 
PPO workers. In each process, the PPO worker has the same net-
work structure as the global PPO, and individually interacts with each 
navigation environment to acquire experience data. Unlike existing 
synchronous method (Fan et al., 2020) assuming that 𝑛 PPO workers are 
acting in a fully synchronous manner for environment exploration, our 
AM mechanism allows 𝑛 PPO workers to operate independently without 
interference with each other. In this sense, this AM mechanism can 
make each PPO worker store its own gradient data in a separate cache 
and periodically push the cached data to the global PPO for updating 
the parameters of ASMAC. Concretely, when each PPO worker interacts 
with its own environment to obtain experience data, it calculates a 
separate gradient of loss function in its own thread at each step, fol-
lowed by uploading the gradient to the global PPO. Once all gradients 
computed by 𝑛 PPO workers are accumulated, the global PPO performs 
the gradient descent to update the parameters of its actor and critic 
networks. Once this update is completed, these new parameters are 
sent back to all independent PPO workers simultaneously to complete 
an asynchronous update. At this point, all independent PPO workers 
share the same updated parameters. Then, each PPO worker uses the 
parameters of global PPO to recompute the advantage ̂𝐴 and update 
the old policy 𝜋𝜃 to continue interacting with environments. Whereas 
all PPO workers share same parameters, their interactions with the 
environments are independent. This allows the PPO worker to explore 
different parts of the state space and gather the diverse experience data, 
which can improve the learning process when aggregated by the global 
PPO. Also, since each PPO worker only use global parameters for action 
execution and gradient calculation instead of update its parameters 
independently, all PPO workers can align with the latest policy post-
synchronization. Note that all the PPO workers are initialized with 
same network architecture as global PPO. This ensures workers and the 
global network process observation and compute policies in a unified 
manner. At the start of training, all PPO workers inherit the initial 
parameter of global PPO’s actor and critic networks. These parameters 
are randomly initialized and remain consistent across workers, avoiding 
bias from divergent initial states. Also, the quantity of PPO workers 
used in the AM architecture is empirically set to 8 for a moderate trade-
off between computation efficiency and exploration diversity. The goal 
position and starting point of the AGV in each navigation environment 
are randomly set for boosting model generalization. It is concluded by 
the above AM architecture modeling that independent PPO workers 
share parameters with the global PPO and with each other. With this 
AM training setting, our ASMAC method can not only avoid the use 
of inefficient replay buffer (Mnih et al., 2015), but also break the 
correlation between training samples, thus boosting learning efficiency.
4. Experiments
To verify the effectiveness of our proposed ASMAC navigation 
model in avoiding collision under complex dynamic workspaces, we 
implement our method with ROS Kinetic and Gazebo9.0, while building 
the policy model based on PyTorch. It is trained on a PC with Intel Core 
i7-9800X CPU and GeForce RTX 2080Ti GPU. The training process and 
experiment results of our model are discussed in detail below.
4.1. Model and training details
4.1.1. Model details
The local attention module consists of pre-encoding module and the 
attention encoding module. The number of pre-encoding networks in 
the pre-encoding module is the same as the number of environment 
entity classes. All pre-encoding networks contain a fully connected (FC) 
layer with the size dimension [2, 128], a nonlinear activation function 
(leaky relu), and a LayerNorm layer. The attention encoding module 
receives pre-encoding cues that include three attention matrices (𝑾 𝑘, 
𝑾 𝑞, and 𝑾 𝑣) with the unit dimension [128, 128]. The three attention 
matrices are randomly initialized as the same unit dimension of [128, 
128], through using the Xavier initialization trick (Dong et al., 2024). 
This way is able to scale random weights by inverse square root of 
input dimensions, ensuring the variance of attention outputs remains 
consistent across layers and preventing vanishing or exploding gradi-
ents in early training. Meanwhile, the attention matrices are learned 
parameters that are updated during the overall training process of 
ASMAC model. Hence, they are updated via backpropagation, utilizing 
the Adam optimizer with learning rate 2 × 10 −4. It is noted that only 
the AGV self has the query matrix, and the number of 𝑾 𝑘 and 𝑾 𝑣 is 
equal to the observed entity types. The actor–critic module consists of 
the value network and the policy network. The value network receives 
the local encoding from the local attention module, which contains two 
hidden layers with dimensions [128, 128] and [128, 1]. The structure 
of policy network is similar to value network. It also takes the local 
encoding as the input, and consists of three hidden FC layers with the 
dimension of [128, 128], [128, 128], and [128, 2], respectively. Note 
that the hidden layers of the actor–critic networks are equipped with 
leaky relu as nonlinear activation function to mitigate the vanishing 
gradient problem during training. The specific parameter settings of 
ASMAC are presented in Table  2.
4.1.2. Training details
In order to learn a robust collision avoidance policy, we expose our 
AGV to diverse workspaces by creating different complex scenes with 
various obstacles. These simulation scenarios are built using the Gazebo 
mobile robot simulator (Koenig and Howard, 2004) to accomplish the 
policy training, as shown in Fig.  5. For scenario 1 without any obstacles, 
we generate random start and goal positions for robot at the beginning 
of each episode. Robot in scenario 3 is randomly initialized to avoid the 
static obstacles. As for scenarios 2 and 4, the policy is trained to realize 
autonomous navigation for the robot in a variety of pedestrian crowds. 
Also, we add timestep-varying random noises to the local observation 
of AGV to simulate imperfect sensing environments. This noise mimics 
partial sensor failures (e.g., missing obstacle position data), which 
forces the policy to learn robust feature extractions.
Whereas RL training in various scenarios simultaneously can enable 
robust performance of collision avoidance, it enables the training pro-
cedure more difficult. To tackle such difficulty, a two-stage training 
Engineering Applications of Artiϧcial Intelligence 167 (2026) 113779 
8 

===== PAGE 9 =====
C. Sun et al.
Fig. 5. Scenarios used to train the collision avoidance policy.
Table 2
Parameter variable settings of our ASMAC navigation 
model.
 Parameters Value  
 PID gains 𝐾𝑝, 𝐾𝑖, 𝐾𝑑 0.2, 0.1, 0.02  
 𝐾 (MLP) 5  
 Comfort threshold 𝑑com 0.3 m  
 Num entity type 𝑀 4  
 Num entity 𝑁𝑚 15  
 Num PPO worker 𝑛 8  
 Num episode 5 × 104  
 Num start train 1024  
 Episode length 100  
 Learning rate 𝑙𝑟𝜃 , 𝑙𝑟𝜔 1 × 10−4, 2 × 10−4 
 Buffer size 2 × 105  
 Batch size 𝑁 1024  
 Num samples 𝑁1, 𝑁2, 𝑁3 600, 256, 168  
 Hyperparameters 𝜆, 𝜂 0.96, 0.01  
 Update frequency 4  
 Multi head ℎ 4  
 FOV 2𝜋, 8 m  
process for the ASMAC model is proposed, through the inspiration of 
curriculum learning paradigm (Bengio et al., 2009). The simulation 
scenarios in Fig.  5 are used to train the RL-based model in two stages, 
from simple to complex. In the first stage, our goal is to encourage 
AGV to learn a high-efficiency collision avoidance pattern. For that, 
we only train the robot in a simply scenario (i.e., scenarios 1 and 3 
in Fig.  5) with static obstacles. The effect in such case tends to quickly 
find a reasonable collision-free solution. Once the AGV achieves reliable 
level of collision avoidance, this training process is stopped and the 
trained policy is saved. Then, we continue to update the policy in 
the second stage by training in other more complex scenarios 2 and 
4 in Fig.  5, while exploiting a larger collision penalty (−6) to ensure 
the navigation safety. Clearly shown in Fig.  6, the two-stage training 
policy can get higher rewards and has faster convergence speed than 
the policy trained from scratch with the same number of episodes. 
It is noteworthy that when switching to second training stage, our 
reward curve drops slightly because of the change of train scenario, 
but the curve rises to a higher point very soon. The reason behind 
this may lie in two aspects: (1) The changes of training scenarios can 
introduce new variations. This can make the model gained from the 
first stage to struggle to adapt to the unfamiliar condition initially, 
leading to a temporary drop in performance. (2) The adjustment of 
hyperparameters in model during the transition to the second training 
stage could also have a slight negative impact on its learning process, 
but it can ultimately lead to better improved performance once the 
model captures the underlying pattern in the new data.
4.2. Evaluation of our navigation model with different configurations
Our navigation policy exploits a combination of local attention (LA) 
and significance measurement (SM), and is augmented with MLP, PPO, 
and AM. In the following part, an intensive experimental analysis of our 
Fig. 6. Discounted reward curves for each step during the training process.
Table 3
Abbreviations of the proposed different configuration models.
 Abbreviations Configurations  
 PPO (actor–critic) RL-only navigation model, i.e., baseline  
 LPPO Integrate local attention module (LAM) in PPO 
 SLPPO Fuse SMRR in LPPO  
 MLPPO Integrate MLP in LPPO  
 ASMAC (Ours) Integrate AM mechanism in MLPPO  
 Ours-NoPID ASMAC without PID operations  
navigation model with different configurations is built to systematically 
ablate the components and review the importance quantitatively. To 
simplify the expression, the abbreviations of proposed model with 
different configurations are given in Table  3. Note that PPO, LPPO 
and SLPPO all utilize the basic configuration (without MLP reward) as 
their reward setting, while the other three models use the full reward 
configuration we describe above (i.e., Eq. (5) that integrates the MLP 
reward function into the basic configuration). For presenting a fair 
comparison, all the models are trained on the scenarios shown in Fig. 
5 with the proposed two-stage training method. The key difference 
among these different configuration models is that unlike PPO, LPPO, 
SLPPO, MLPPO acting in a fully synchronous manner for environment 
exploration, the ASMAC and Ours-NoPID utilize AM mechanism to 
enable parallel experience collection and gradient computation in a 
separate cache, breaking sample correlation and accelerating explo-
ration. To test above-mentioned models with different configuration, a 
representative collision avoidance scene shown in Fig.  7 is constructed. 
In the scene, the multi-moving obstacles at a constant speed are set 
to encounter the AGV. In detail, the translational speed of obstacle 1 
(OBS1), OBS2, OBS3, OBS4, and OBS5 are 0.2 m/s, 0.4 m/s, 0.6 m/s, 
0.8 m/s and 1.0 m/s respectively. The pink straight line in the Figure 
is the reference mission path (RMP) of AGV.
As can be observed, the baseline PPO struggles to guarantee the 
optimality of final track. This happens because they are rarely able 
to understand collision situation in the dynamic scenes, resulting in 
useless or even erroneous searches in wrong direction, especially when 
Engineering Applications of Artiϧcial Intelligence 167 (2026) 113779 
9 

===== PAGE 10 =====
C. Sun et al.
Fig. 7. AGV collision avoidance of the proposed different configuration models in dynamic scene.
obstacles occur. The LPPO can acquire a relatively short track along 
RMP. This mainly benefits from the LAM that can extract and encode 
critical environmental features to reduce unnecessary search and im-
prove navigation efficiency. When the SMRR is integrated into the 
navigation policy, the length of the track generated by SLPPO is shorter 
than that of LPPO. Yet, the desired collision-free action commands out-
put by LPPO and SLPPO are unstable, leading to significant fluctuations 
in the AGV’s trajectory. It can be found that the track fluctuation can be 
further mitigated by MLPPO, compared with the SLPPO. This demon-
strates the effective function of MLP technique in helping AGV generate 
more reasonable and farsighted collision avoidance policies. Intuitively, 
our final ASMAC acquires the best navigation result in the dynamic 
scene. It can not only complete collision avoidance tasks efficiently, 
but also produce a continuous, smooth, and dynamic feasible robot 
trajectory. Besides, the track of Ours-NoPID produces obvious trajectory 
catastrophe throughout the AGV collision avoidance, which does not 
satisfy the motion constraints of AGV in practical applications.
While it is easy to find interesting pros and cons for any given nav-
igation task, it is more  useful to draw a conclusion after aggregating a 
large number of randomly-generated cases. Consequently, we design an 
algorithm to randomly generate 500 navigation episodes for the scene 
to quantitatively evaluate the performance of different configuration 
models. To quantify the navigation performance, a set of evaluation 
metrics are adopted in the experiments, including success rate (SR), 
time to goal (TG), collision rate (CR), discounted reward (DR) and 
trajectory length (TL). Note that the SR means that rate of case in 
Table 4
Performance metrics comparison of different configurations on the dynamic 
scene.
 Methods SR CR Avg TG (s) Avg DR Avg TL (m) 
 PPO 0.52 0.65 31.36 −25.13 23.15  
 LPPO 0.66 0.43 22.46 −21.65 19.67  
 SLPPO 0.79 0.32 20.62 −18.74 18.12  
 MLPPO 0.92 0.09 18.95 −13.86 17.48  
 Ours 0.98 0.02 16.22 −11.52 14.95  
 Ours-NoPID 0.96 0.04 17.56 −10.38 16.32  
which AGV successfully reaches its target within 60 timesteps. The 
CR is defined as the percent of cases with a collision. TG and TL are 
reported based on the success cases. Detailed comparison results are 
aggregated in Table  4.
First, we observe a relatively better navigation performance for 
the LPPO model by  comparing the results from PPO. It verifies the 
effect of LAM in assisting our method to focus on the information 
that is more important for collision-free action decision. Subsequently, 
considering the navigation performance difference among LPPO, SLPPO 
and MLPPO, we see that the idea of each component has a positive 
effect on the model. When bringing the SMRR into LPPO, the navigation 
results of SLPPO  are significantly superior to that of LPPO. It achieves 
0.79 in SR and 20.62s in average TG, showing 19.7% improvement and 
8.19% reduction in average SR and TG respectively. When MLP and 
SMRR are both integrated into LPPO, the average TG of MLPPO  is a 
Engineering Applications of Artiϧcial Intelligence 167 (2026) 113779 
10 

===== PAGE 11 =====
C. Sun et al.
Fig. 8. The curves of SR with different (a) 𝑁1 and (b) 𝑁2 parameters on the dynamic scene of Fig.  7.
gentle reduction with respect to SLPPO, while the SR has a significant 
ascent from 0.79 to 0.92. We consider that the SMRR enhances the 
sample utilization that is conductive to limit the sampling space for 
efficiency while increasing the probability of avoiding collision to some 
extent. Also, the designed MLP generally motivates AGV to master the 
skill of generating more reasonable collision avoidance decisions. It is 
critical for collision-free policy learning in complex dynamic scenarios.
Clearly, our ASMAC combining both PPO and AM to jointly op-
timize navigation policy, gains best performance on the complex dy-
namic scene in almost all metrics. This shows the effectiveness of the 
combination of each component in improving the performance of the 
method. Additionally, when comparing Ours with Ours-NoPID, it can 
be found that our model shows 2.04% improvements in SR, while 
50% and 7.6% reductions in CR and average TG, respectively. We sug-
gest that the PID facilitates us introduce kinematics constraints to en-
hance the learned navigation model, enabling AGV to final continuous, 
dynamic-feasible, and smooth trajectory travel.
It is noteworthy that while the ASMAC system performs well for 
obstacles up to 1.0 m/s (the maximum tested speed), there are failure 
modes observed under fast obstacle motions. In detail, due to the MLP’s 
limited lookahead horizon (𝐾=5 lookahead timesteps), the failure 
mode can emerge under extremely fast obstacle motions (> 1.0 m/s). 
To address this, future works will be done to develop a local temporal-
spatial graph-based social encoder with multi-sensor fusion, which can 
perform social-interaction hidden state extractions, and handle the 
issue of failure modes observed under fast obstacle motions within the 
FOV of AGV.
In order to further analyze the impacts of parameters 𝑁1, 𝑁2, and 
𝑁3 in collision-free navigation of our ASMAC, a one-factor-at-a-time 
(OFAT) method is employed, where each parameter is varied within 
a predefined range while others are held constant at default value, as 
shown in Table  5. When 500 navigation tasks are randomly generated 
in the dynamic scenes of Fig.  7, the test results in terms of SR are 
shown in Fig.  8. The 𝑁1 is used to adjust the proportions of high-value 
samples to encourage the network to converge in the right direction by 
emphasizing the most valuable experiences. In Fig.  8(a), the SR value 
shows a trend of first rising and then falling when 𝑁1 increases. The 
main reason is that neither too small nor too large value of 𝑁1 can 
realize a moderate trade-off between high-value and ordinary samples. 
Since a better navigation performance is achieved when 𝑁1 is changed 
from 500 to 700, 𝑁1 is set to 600 for a good trade-off in this work. The 
𝑁2 is used to maintain recent samples to provide valuable information 
about the current dynamics of environments. From Fig.  8(b), we can 
observe that the navigation performance improves gradually when 𝑁2
increases from 32 to 640, while tends to be stable when 𝑁2 is around 
256. Hence, 𝑁2 is set as 256 to properly sample recent experiences.
Table 5
Parameter ranges and default values for sampling stratification sensitivity 
analysis.
 Parameters Range Default value 
 𝑁1 200, 300, 400, 500, 600, 700, 800 600  
 𝑁2 32, 64, 128, 256, 512, 640 256  
4.3. Collision avoidance performance evaluation
In order to further verify the superiority of our ASMAC in collision-
free navigation, we provide a thorough evaluation by comparing it 
with four mainstream available methods, including RL-based AL-DSAC
(Zhou et al., 2024), TL-HDR (Zhang et al., 2024), M-DQN (Sheng 
et al., 2025) and conventional APF (Malone et al., 2017) methods. It is 
noteworthy that we utilize the reward function as defined in Eq. (5) 
for all RL-based methods in this part to present a fair comparison 
among them. Besides, all the RL-based policy models are trained on the 
scenarios shown in Fig.  5 with the proposed two-stage training method. 
The APF method for AGV is implemented by an abstract artificial 
potential field with the default parameters provided by the author.
In the inference test stage, two types of challenging test scenarios 
that do not occur during training phase are built in our experiment: 
(1) ‘‘narrow passage’’ and (2) ‘‘detour’’. Collision avoidance in the 
narrow passage is a common issue for AGV navigation. In such case, the 
passable area is generally located in the gap among two obstacles. The 
navigation evolvement processes with narrow passage are detailed in 
Fig.  9. Note that we randomly set four pedestrians moving around to in-
crease the difficulty of AGV collision avoidance in narrow passage. Each 
pedestrian is controlled by the plugin ‘‘ActorPlugin’’ within Gazebo in 
this study. The results show that it is difficult for the RL-based AL-
DSAC, TL-HDR and M-DQN approaches to sample the area within the 
narrow channel in a limited number of iterations. The limitation makes 
it hard to plan a reasonable path in the narrow passage. We can observe 
in traditional method that APF can narrow sampling space based on re-
pulsive force generated when approaching obstacles to shorten useless 
searches. Yet, it still suffers from the impoverishment of the trajectories 
swing violently when AGV passes through pedestrian. Also, it can be 
seen that our ASMAC not only greatly reduces the unnecessary searches 
but significantly improves the stability and smoothness of trajectories.
Subsequently, the ‘‘detouring’’ scenario is designed to simulate the 
task of AGV avoiding dynamic obstacles in the course of detour to reach 
the goal. Herein, the pedestrian is exploited as moving obstacle for 
experimental evaluation, which walk on a 1.3-meters fixed-radius circle 
at an angular velocity of 0.4 rad/s. The real-time evolvement results are 
shown in Fig.  10. We observe that our ASMAC can output a reasonable 
Engineering Applications of Artiϧcial Intelligence 167 (2026) 113779 
11 

===== PAGE 12 =====
C. Sun et al.
Fig. 9. Collision avoidance navigation of the different methods in the ‘‘narrow passage’’ scenario.
Fig. 10. Collision avoidance navigation of the different methods in the ‘‘detour’’ scenario.
policy, making AGV avoid movement obstacles smoothly and detour to 
reach the goal successfully. However, the effect in such case tends to 
bring about great difficulty to other approaches. For instance, AL-DSAC, 
TL-HDR and M-DQN can avoid collisions, but generating unnatural 
trajectories obviously. This means that the desirable decision output is 
unstable that cannot guarantee the trajectory’s optimality. Unexpect-
edly, APF fails to collision avoidance. The potential reason may be 
that AGV is much less affected by obstacles’ repulsive force than by 
the attraction of goal in such cases, which makes it difficult to plan a 
detouring path to dodge obstacles based on the APF algorithm.
To further compare the quality of collision-free navigation quantita-
tively, we summarize SR, CR, TG, and TL for different methods in Table 
6, through randomly-generated 600 navigation tasks in each complex 
scenario. As can be seen, the conventional APF has a low SR, but the 
navigation time within limited successful cases is short. For the RL-
based AL-DSAC and M-DQN, although a general better performance 
can be achieved in terms of the SR and CR, they consume more time 
to generate longer collision-free trajectory. The reason may lie in that 
due to limited training data, these trained RL methods do not yield 
sensible performance, thus needing to a long-distance navigation for 
better collision-free exploration. It also shows that TL-HDR achieves 
Engineering Applications of Artiϧcial Intelligence 167 (2026) 113779 
12 

===== PAGE 13 =====
C. Sun et al.
Table 6
Performance metrics comparison of different methods on two challenging scenarios.
 Models Narrow passage (12 m×12 m) Detour (18 m×18 m)
 SR CR Avg TG (s) Avg TL (m) SR CR Avg TG (s) Avg TL (m) 
 APF 0.65 0.35 18.53 18.36 0.16 0.85 24.35 27.62  
 M-DQN 0.74 0.27 26.63 22.58 0.72 0.39 29.62 33.78  
 AL-DSAC 0.82 0.19 25.87 21.96 0.81 0.20 28.51 32.39  
 TL-HDR 0.93 0.07 17.96 18.02 0.92 0.08 23.27 26.98  
 ASMAC (Ours) 0.97 0.03 16.45 17.62 0.98 0.02 21.15 25.18  
Fig. 11. Navigation performance (a) SR, CR, and (b) average TG comparisons for different methods in scenes with varied moving obstacle densities.
a suboptimal performance. This mainly benefits from the maximum 
causal entropy-based inverse that can capture the human preference 
characteristics of low-risk areas of the environment. In summary, our 
ASMAC achieves best navigation performance on these two scenes for 
all metrics. It is mainly attributed to three aspects: (1) ASMAC uses the 
combination of AM and PPO as the underlying actor–critic architecture 
instead of RL-purely, for efficient and robust decision-making, and 
considers PID operation, which lays a foundation for final executable, 
smooth, and continuous navigation. (2) ASMAC uses the MLP trick to 
predict the future events of collision threat. It can not only evaluate the 
impact of current action on future AGV-environment interaction, also 
prevent AGV from generating intrusive, shortsighted, and unnatural 
motion policies. (3) Through the tight cooperation between SMRR and 
LAM, ASMAC system can improve its perception ability, thus making 
effective and safe collision avoidance decisions rapidity under complex 
dynamic scenes.
Moreover, we design one extra scene with varied moving obstacle 
densities to further evaluate the performance of different methods. 
Specifically, this scene involves a 7 × 7 m 2 region, allocating 10, 20, 
30, 40, and 50 obstacles that randomly move around, respectively. 
Thus, the obstacle density for the scene is about 0.2, 0.4, 0.6, 0.8 
and 1 moving obstacle per square meter, respectively. Each obstacle 
density of evaluation involves 800 different navigation tasks. From the 
experimental results in Fig.  11(a), whereas all methods have a decline 
in SR and a rise in CR when the density changes from 0.2 to 1, our 
ASMAC by a large margin outperforms the other methods. As shown 
in Fig.  11(b), ASMAC has least time-consuming. The navigation time 
of our method only increases gently from 10.32 s in 0.2 density to 
12.54 s in 1 density, while that of others has a dramatic rise, e.g., APF 
from 11.48 s to 16.95 s. It is concluded by the data comparison that 
our ASMAC can make effective decision to safely complete collision 
avoidance in complex dynamic scenario, still preserving high real-time 
performance.
4.4. Multi-AGV collision avoidance test
In the above experiments, we focus on testing the collision-free 
navigation of a single AGV. In this section, we design multiple AGVs 
operating independently to avoid each other’s experiments to further 
examine the navigation ability of our approach. In detail, an 8-AGV 
bilateral bidirectional interaction scenario is developed, in which each 
one of these AGVs utilizes same method for avoiding other AGVs during 
interaction. In the experiment, we adopt M-DQN, AL-DSAC and TL-HDR 
as comparison baselines. The ultimate multi-AGV interaction results are 
shown in Fig.  12, including the comparison of total path length and 
average timestep of AGVs. As we can see, the interaction results for 
both M-DQN and AL-DSAC intuitively look similar, with AL-DSAC being 
slightly more efficient. Besides, each AGV trained by the two methods 
are relatively conservative, tending to in advance go around a distance. 
Contrarily, each AGV using our ASMAC can acquire a proper track for 
interaction to guarantee no collision with other AGVs, while achieves 
best results in terms of the average timestep and total path length 
metrics. This suggests the effectiveness and robustness of our ASMAC in 
multi-AGV collision avoidance. It also shows that the interaction results 
of TL-HDR are not better than that of ASMAC. The potential reason 
is that due to limited perception data from single sensor (LiDAR), TL-
HDR cannot capture critical environmental feature effectively, thus 
preventing the AGV from focusing on important collision-free policy 
exploration.
Also, we set the AGV number to 16 in this bilateral bidirectional 
interaction scenario, which is a highly-challenging scene to collision 
avoidance. M-DQN, AL-DSAC and TL-HDR are also used as three com-
parison baselines. When 500 navigation tasks are randomly generated 
in this scene, the SR, CR, TL and TG metrics are reported in Table 
7. As can be seen, M-DQN has worse navigation results than AL-
DSAC and TL-HDR, while our ASMAC remains the best in navigation 
success, safety and efficiency among all four competing methods. This 
confirms again the effectiveness and scalability of our ASMAC method 
in collision avoidance.
4.5. Real-world navigation analysis
The ASMAC method presented in simulations has realized many 
satisfactory properties, but it still exists some challenges of transferring 
our learned policy ASMAC from simulation to real world. First, in 
real situations, noises in observation are ubiquitous due to imperfect 
Engineering Applications of Artiϧcial Intelligence 167 (2026) 113779 
13 

===== PAGE 14 =====
C. Sun et al.
Fig. 12. Visualization of eight-AGV bilateral bidirectional interaction results of different methods.
Table 7
Performance comparison of collision-free navigation of different methods on 
sixteen-AGV bilateral bidirectional interaction scenarios.
 Methods SR CR Avg TG (s) Avg TL (m) 
 M-DQN 0.62 0.45 25.12 12.62  
 AL-DSAC 0.78 0.26 21.46 11.83  
 TL-HDR 0.89 0.12 19.53 10.96  
 ASMAC (Ours) 0.98 0.02 17.61 9.98  
sensing. Second, the simulated ASMAC can adjust velocity smoothly 
by PID, but real AGV with low-torque motors may fail to decelerate 
or accelerate quickly enough to avoid dynamic obstacles, e.g., a fast-
moving pedestrian. Finally, it is not guaranteed that different real 
AGVs generate consistent behavior given same control command, due 
to many real-world factors, e.g., motor properties, mechanics details, 
and frictions cannot be accurately modeled in simulation.
To further test the generalization capabilities of our navigation 
model in real world, we use a self-developed differential-driving robot 
prototype to demonstrate our model, as shown in Fig.  13. The sensors 
are a Rplidar A2 Lidar (used for obstacle detection), a Kinect V2 
camera (used for moving object detection Sun et al., 2023), and a 
NOKOV motion capture system (used for indoor global localization). 
These sensor kits provide the observations for AGV. Then, AGV executes 
action commands output from our navigation system that consists of a 
software framework (ROS Kinetic in Ubuntu16.04) and an industrial 
computer (Intel Core i7-9800X CPU 8-GB RAM). Although there is no 
perfect state knowledge, as was available in simulation, the AGV can 
avoid collisions using only on-board sensing.
Note that in the practical implementation of the proposed ASMAC 
framework, the observation distribution  (𝒔) formally defines proba-
bility of receiving local observations 𝒙𝑡 given the true global state 𝒔𝑡 in 
a POMDP. In this work, it is pragmatically approximated via the AGV’s 
sensor fusion pipeline and LAM, which together handles the ‘‘imper-
fect local observation’’ characteristics of the POMDP for collision-free 
navigation. Specifically, the AGV’s onboard sensors replicate imperfect 
the local observation scenes assumed in method’s design, and collect 
heterogeneous data that collectively approximates  (𝒔) by reducing 
observation uncertainties for the ASMAC model. Meanwhile, by fusing 
the collected heterogeneous data can reduce individual sensor noise 
and FOV limitations, thereby increasing the likelihood that observed 
𝒙𝑡 aligns with true 𝒔𝑡. Furthermore, the local attention module (LAM) 
refines the approximation through prioritizing collision-critical obser-
vation. On the one hand, it utilizes class-specific network to pre-encode 
observations of distinct entity types. This ensures that observations 
of high-impact entities are weighted more heavily in final encoding 
𝑬𝑎𝑡𝑡𝑒𝑛
𝑒𝑛𝑡𝑖𝑡𝑦, thus effectively sharpening the observation distributions to focus 
on states that matter for safe navigation. On the other hand, it uti-
lizes the dense synthesizer attention to fuse entity observations with 
Fig. 13. Robot prototype for navigation experiments of collision avoidance.
the AGV’s self-state. This process cannot solely downweight irrelevant 
observations, but also amplify reliable and relevant ones. The effect 
in such cases is inclined to approximate  (𝒔) as a distribution where 
observations with strong collision-relevant signals are more likely to be 
trusted.
The navigation experiments are conducted in our laboratory (ap-
prox. 150 m2). A typical example of our navigation is shown in Fig. 
14(a) that does not occur during the training phase. Both static (boxes) 
and moving (pedestrians) obstacles are placed between robot’s starting 
position and goal about 3 m away to interfere with the robot. From the 
trajectory in Fig.  14(b), we observe that robot can not only smoothly 
avoid static obstacles, but slow down adaptively to wait for the pedes-
trian. After the pedestrians pass, the AGV starts again towards the goal. 
Eventually, it successfully and safely navigates to its goal without any 
collisions.
In addition, the navigation performance is quantitatively measured 
by randomly setting up another 100 tasks in the laboratory with 
complex dynamic scene. M-DQN, AL-DSAC and TL-HDR are also used 
as three counterparts for performance comparison. Table  8 lists the 
quantitative results, including SR, CR, average TL and TG. A navigation 
task is regarded as a success only if the robot stops near the goal 
(e.g., 0.2 m) within 100 timesteps. As illustrated in the quantitative 
results, M-DQN and AL-DSAC obtain worse navigation results than TL-
HDR, while our ASMAC remains the best in navigation success, safety, 
and efficiency among all four competing methods. It has a higher than 
7% SR and a lower than 8% CR, while shows a 11.4% reduction in 
average TG, compared to the TL-HDR. The trial outcomes demonstrate 
that our ASMAC model can be well deployed to real robot, presenting 
an excellent collision-free navigation capability in complex dynamic 
real-world environments.
Engineering Applications of Artiϧcial Intelligence 167 (2026) 113779 
14 

===== PAGE 15 =====
C. Sun et al.
Fig. 14. Collision avoidance navigation of our proposed method in real world (intelligent manufacturing laboratory). (a) the physical robot navigates to its goal 
in a real complex scene with both moving and static obstacles. (b) the robot’s trajectory in the two-dimensional coordinate system, corresponding to (a) on the 
left. In this Figure (b), the green solid line represents robot’s trajectory, the color dashed lines are the pedestrians’ paths, and the black boxes refer to the static 
obstacles.
Table 8
Performance comparison of collision avoidance navigation of different methods 
on complex dynamic real-world scenarios.
 Methods SR CR Avg TG (s) Avg TL (m) 
 M-DQN 0.71 0.38 23.16 13.62  
 AL-DSAC 0.69 0.35 24.28 14.97  
 TL-HDR 0.90 0.11 19.62 11.83  
 ASMAC (Ours) 0.97 0.03 17.38 9.96  
Subsequently, Table  9 gives the average computing costs and time 
complexity on each task of real-word navigation for different compo-
nents of our ASMAC. The mathematical modeling of total per-batch 
complexity can be formulated as follows: 
𝑂𝐴𝑆𝑀𝐴𝐶 = 𝑂𝐿𝐴𝑀 + 𝑂𝑆𝑀𝑅𝑅 + 𝑂𝐴𝑀 + 𝑂𝑃 𝑃 𝑂
= 𝑂 (𝑀 ⋅ 𝑁𝑚 ⋅ (𝐷2 + ℎ ⋅ 𝐷)+ 𝑁 + 𝑛 ⋅ 𝑃 + 𝑃 ⋅ 𝑁) (19)
where 𝐷 = 128 is the embedding dimension of pre-encoding network, 
and 𝑃 is the number of model parameters in the actor–critic network. 
𝑂𝐿𝐴𝑀 is the LAM time complexity.
Our ASMAC system without any code optimization is implemented 
within ROS. Clearly, it shows that the PPO component has highest 
time complexity, which requires the most run time, occupying 87.01% 
among the total computation cost. This mainly because this process 
contains three time-consuming high-dimensional matrix operations, 
i.e., objective clip, advantage estimation, and gradient calculation. The 
computation of SMRR and AM are very efficient, requiring only 1.22s 
in total. Besides, the LAM cost 1.04s, which can be further accelerated 
in a parallel computation way. It is concluded by formalizing the 
time complexity and computing cost that our ASMAC’s experimental 
performance is not just effective but also computationally feasible for 
real-world deployment.
5. Conclusion
A novel collision avoidance method, ASMAC, is presented in this 
paper for efficient and safe AGV navigation in complex dynamic en-
vironments. AM mechanism is combined with PPO algorithm to form 
a novel actor–critic RL model. It can boost sample efficiency in navi-
gation policy learning to optimize and accelerate the model training. 
Then, we extend SMRR and LAM to the actor–critic paradigm, which 
improve model perception ability to make effective and safe collision-
free decision rapidity. Besides, MLP reward setting is devised to predict 
Table 9
Average elapsed cost and time complexity of different components on real-
word navigation.
 Components Complexity Time (s) Ratio (%) 
 LAM 𝑂 (𝑀 ⋅ 𝑁𝑚 ⋅ (𝐷2 + ℎ ⋅ 𝐷)) 1.04 5.96  
 SMRR 𝑂 (𝑁) 0.36 2.28  
 AM 𝑂 (𝑛 ⋅ 𝑃 ) 0.86 4.75  
 PPO 𝑂 (𝑃 ⋅ 𝑁) 15.12 87.01  
 Total 𝑂𝐴𝑆𝑀𝐴𝐶 17.38 100  
the future events of collision threat, which can not only evaluate the 
impact of current action on future AGV-environment interaction, but 
also prevent the AGV from generating intrusive, shortsighted, and un-
natural motion policies. Finally, a great deal of navigation experiments 
is built in complex dynamic scenes. The experimental result analysis 
of different configurations demonstrates the specific effect of different 
algorithm elements. By comparing our ASMAC with other up-to-date 
methods, improved safety and generalization, and preserving a higher 
efficiency than other counterparts, are indicated.
The ASMAC approach presented in this work has realized many 
satisfactory properties, but it still has some limitations that need further 
to be researched in the future. On the one hand, the fast obstacle motion 
interferences are not considered in current navigation system, which 
may introduce difficulty in extracting hidden state relevant to collision 
avoidance task. To this end, a local temporal-spatial graph-based social 
encoder with multi-sensor fusion will be developed and then embedded 
into ASMAC system. On the other hand, the approach solely focuses on 
local collision avoidance and does not consider global path planning. 
This may lead to locally optimal but globally inefficient path, especially 
in large environments. Hence, we will attempt to combine the system 
with classical mapping mechanism (e.g., SLAM) to obtain satisfactory 
global collision-free navigation in a large dynamic workspace.
CRediT authorship contribution statement
Chao Sun: Writing – review & editing, Validation, Supervision, Soft-
ware, Resources, Funding acquisition, Formal analysis. Jiang Wang: 
Writing – review & editing. Xing Wu: Writing – review & editing, 
Resources, Funding acquisition. Chaoxu Mu: Supervision, Conceptual-
ization. Changyin Sun: Validation, Resources, Funding acquisition.
Engineering Applications of Artiϧcial Intelligence 167 (2026) 113779 
15 

===== PAGE 16 =====
C. Sun et al.
Declaration of competing interest
The authors declare that they have no known competing finan-
cial interests or personal relationships that could have appeared to 
influence the work reported in this paper.
Acknowledgments
This research is supported in part by the National Natural Science 
Foundation of China under Grant 52475521, 62495083 and 62503005, 
and the Anhui Provincial Natural Science Foundation under Grant 
2408085QF208.
Data availability
No data was used for the research described in the article.
References
Adam, K.D.B.J., et al., 2014. A method for stochastic optimization. 1412, (6), arXiv 
preprint arXiv:1412.6980.
Bengio, Y., Louradour, J., Collobert, R., Weston, J., 2009. Curriculum learning. In: Proc. 
Int. Conf. Mach. Learn.. ICML, pp. 41–48.
Chen, Y., Peng, H., Grizzle, J., 2018. Obstacle avoidance for low-speed autonomous 
vehicles with barrier function. IEEE Trans. Control Syst. Technol. 26 (1), 194–206.
Cheng, J., et al., 2022. A review of visual SLAM methods for autonomous driving 
vehicles. Eng. Appl. Artif. Intell. 114, 104992.
Dong, L., He, Z., Song, C., Yuan, X., Zhang, H., 2024. Multi-robot social-aware 
cooperative planning in pedestrian environments using attention-based actor-critic. 
Artif. Intell. Rev. 57 (4), 108.
Everett, M., Chen, Y.F., How, J.P., 2021. Collision avoidance in pedestrian-rich 
environments with deep reinforcement learning. IEEE Access 9, 10357–10377.
Fan, T., Long, P., Liu, W., Pan, J., 2020. Distributed multi-robot collision avoidance 
via deep reinforcement learning for navigation in complex scenarios. Int. J. Robot. 
Res. 39 (7), 856–892.
Godoy, J., Karamouzas, I., Guy, S.J., Gini, M.L., 2016. Moving in a crowd: Safe and 
efficient navigation among heterogeneous agents. In: Proc. Int. Joint Conf. Artific. 
Intell.. IJCAI, pp. 294–300.
Gu, T., Chen, G., Li, J., Lin, C., Rao, Y., Zhou, J., Lu, J., 2022. Stochastic trajectory 
prediction via motion indeterminacy diffusion. In: Proc. IEEE/CVF Comput. Vis. 
Pattern Recognit. pp. 17113–17122.
Guo, B., Guo, N., Cen, Z., 2022. Obstacle avoidance with dynamic avoidance risk 
region for mobile robots in dynamic environments. IEEE Robot. Autom. Lett. 7 
(3), 5850–5857.
He, Z., Dong, L., Sun, C., Wang, J., 2022. Asynchronous multithreading reinforcement-
learning-based path planning and tracking for unmanned underwater vehicle. IEEE 
Trans. Syst. Man Cybern. Syst. 52 (5), 2757–2769.
Huang, Y., Ding, H., Zhang, Y., Wang, H., Cao, D., Xu, N., Hu, C., 2019. A motion 
planning and tracking framework for autonomous vehicles based on artificial 
potential field elaborated resistance network approach. IEEE Trans. Ind. Electron. 
67 (2), 1376–1386.
Kiumarsi, B., Vamvoudakis, K.G., Modares, H., Lewis, F.L., 2017. Optimal and au-
tonomous control using reinforcement learning: A survey. IEEE Trans. Neural Netw. 
Learn. Syst. 29 (6), 2042–2062.
Koenig, N., Howard, A., 2004. Design and use paradigms for gazebo, an open-source 
multi-robot simulator. IROS, In: Proc. IEEE/RSJ Int. Conf. Intell. Robots Syst., vol. 
3, pp. 2149–2154.
Lee, D.H., Lee, S.S., Ahn, C.K., Shi, P., Lim, C.-C., 2020. Finite distribution estimation-
based dynamic window approach to reliable obstacle avoidance of mobile robot. 
IEEE Trans. Ind. Electron. 68 (10), 9998–10006.
Lin, C., Cheng, Y., Wang, X., Yuan, J., Wang, G., 2023. Transformer-based dual-channel 
self-attention for UUV autonomous collision avoidance. IEEE Trans. Intell. Veh. 8 
(3), 2319–2331.
Lin, H.-I., Shodiq, M.A.F., Hsieh, M.F., 2025. Robot path planning based on 
three-dimensional artificial potential field. Eng. Appl. Artif. Intell. 144, 110127.
Liu, S., et al., 2023. Intention aware robot crowd navigation with attention-
based interaction graph. In: Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Robot. Automat.. ICRA, pp. 
12015–12021.
Long, P., Fan, T., Liao, X., Liu, W., Zhang, H., Pan, J., 2018. Towards optimally 
decentralized multi-robot collision avoidance via deep reinforcement learning. In: 
Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Robot. Automat.. ICRA, pp. 6252–6259.
Malone, N., Chiang, H.-T., Lesser, K., Oishi, M., Tapia, L., 2017. Hybrid dynamic 
moving obstacle avoidance using a stochastic reachable set-based potential field. 
IEEE Trans. Robot. 33 (5), 1124–1138.
Missura, M., Bennewitz, M., 2019. Predictive collision avoidance for the dynamic 
window approach. In: Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Robot. Automat.. ICRA, pp. 8620–8626.
Mnih, V., et al., 2015. Human-level control through deep reinforcement learning. Nature 
518, 529–533.
Mnih, V., et al., 2016. Asynchronous methods for deep reinforcement learning. In: Proc. 
Int. Conf. Mach. Learn.. pp. 1928–1937.
Oliehoek, F.A., Amato, C., et al., 2016. A Concise Introduction to Decentralized 
POMDPs, vol. 1, Springer.
Pham, H., Pham, Q.-C., 2018. A new approach to time-optimal path parameterization 
based on reachability analysis. IEEE Trans. Robot. 34 (3), 645–659.
Poonganam, S.N.J., Gopalakrishnan, B., Avula, V.S.S.B.K., Singh, A.K., Krishna, K.M., 
Manocha, D., 2020. Reactive navigation under non-parametric uncertainty through 
hilbert space embedding of probabilistic velocity obstacles. IEEE Robot. Autom. 
Lett. 5 (2), 2690–2697.
Qureshi, A.H., Miao, Y., Simeonov, A., Yip, M.C., 2021. Motion planning networks: 
Bridging the gap between learning-based and classical motion planners. IEEE Trans. 
Robot. 37 (1), 48–66.
Schulman, J., Moritz, P., Levine, S., Jordan, M., Abbeel, P., 2018. High-dimensional 
continuous control using generalized advantage estimation. arXiv preprint arXiv:
1506.02438.
Schulman, J., Wolski, F., Dhariwal, P., Radford, A., Klimov, O., 2017. Proximal policy 
optimization algorithms. arXiv preprint arXiv:1707.06347.
Seo, H., Lee, D., Son, C.Y., Tomlin, C.J., Kim, H.J., 2019. Robust trajectory planning 
for a multirotor against disturbance based on hamilton-jacobi reachability analysis. 
In: Proc. IEEE/RSJ Int. Conf. Intell. Robots Syst.. IROS, pp. 3150–3157.
Seo, H., Son, C.Y., Lee, D., Kim, H.J., 2020. Trajectory planning with safety guaranty 
for a multirotor based on the forward and backward reachability analysis. In: Proc. 
IEEE Int. Conf. Robot. Automat.. ICRA, pp. 7142–7148.
Shen, S., Mulgaonkar, Y., Michael, N., Kumar, V., 2014. Multi-sensor fusion for robust 
autonomous flight in indoor and outdoor environments with a rotorcraft mav. In: 
Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Robot. Automat.. ICRA, pp. 4974–4981.
Sheng, C., Hao, A., Jun, N., Haixia, W., Xiao, L., 2025. Improved M-DQN with 𝜖-UCB 
action selection policy and multi-goal fusion reward function for mobile robot path 
planning. IEEE Trans. Veh. Technol. 74 (4), 5358–5370. http://dx.doi.org/10.1109/
TVT.2024.3503552.
Soares, E.F.d.S., Campos, C.A.V., 2025. Self-supervised learning of monocular depth 
estimators in autonomous vehicles with federated learning. Eng. Appl. Artif. Intell. 
151, 110572.
Song, C., He, Z., Dong, L., 2024. A local-and-global attention reinforcement learning 
algorithm for multiagent cooperative navigation. IEEE Trans. Neural Netw. Learn. 
Syst. 35 (6), 7767–7777.
Sui, Z., Pu, Z., Yi, J., Wu, S., 2020. Formation control with collision avoidance through 
deep reinforcement learning using model-guided demonstration. IEEE Trans. Neural 
Netw. Learn. Syst. 32 (6), 2358–2372.
Sun, C., Wu, X., Sun, J., Sun, C., Dong, L., 2022. Robust pose estimation via hybrid 
point and twin line reprojection for rgb-d vision navigation. IEEE Trans. Instrum. 
Meas. 71, 1–19.
Sun, C., Wu, X., Sun, J., Sun, C., Xu, M., Ge, Q., 2023. Saliency-induced moving object 
detection for robust RGB-d vision navigation under complex dynamic environments. 
IEEE Trans. Intell. Transp. Syst. 24 (10), 10716–10734.
Sun, C., Wu, X., Wang, Y., Sun, C., 2024. Attention-based value classification reinforce-
ment learning for collision-free robot navigation. IEEE Trans. Intell. Veh. 9 (11), 
6898–6911.
Wu, X., Sun, C., Zou, T., Li, L., Wang, L., Liu, H., 2020. Svm-based image partitioning 
for vision recognition of agv guide paths under complex illumination conditions. 
Robot. Comput.-Integr. Manuf. 61, 1–14.
Wu, Q., Xu, K., Wang, J., Xu, M., Gong, X., Manocha, D., 2021. Reinforcement 
learning-based visual navigation with information-theoretic regularization. IEEE 
Robot. Autom. Lett. 6 (2), 731–738.
Xia, J., Zhu, X., Liu, Z., Luo, Y., Wu, Z., Wu, Q., 2023. Research on collision avoidance 
algorithm of unmanned surface vehicle based on deep reinforcement learning. IEEE 
Sensors J. 23 (11), 11262–11273.
Xiao, H., Li, Z., Chen, C.P., 2016. Formation control of leader–follower mobile robots’ 
systems using model predictive control based on neural-dynamic optimization. IEEE 
Trans. Ind. Electron. 63 (9), 5752–5762.
Xu, M., Wang, S., Hu, Y., Tang, H., Cong, R., Nie, L., 2025. Cross-model nested fusion 
network for salient object detection in optical remote sensing images. IEEE Trans. 
Cybern. 55 (11), 5332–5345.
Zhang, B., et al., 2024. A reliable traversability learning method based on human-
demonstrated risk cost mapping for mobile robots over uneven terrain. Eng. Appl. 
Artif. Intell. 138, 109339.
Zhou, C., Huang, B., Fränti, P., 2024. Representation learning and reinforcement 
learning for dynamic complex motion planning system. IEEE Trans. Neural Netw. 
Learn. Syst. 35 (8), 11049–11063.
Engineering Applications of Artiϧcial Intelligence 167 (2026) 113779 
16 

===== PAGE 17 =====
C. Sun et al.
Chao Sun received the M.S. degree in mechanical and 
electrical engineering from the College of Mechanical and 
Electrical Engineering, Nanjing University of Aeronautics 
and Astronautics, Nanjing, China, in 2020, and the Ph.D. 
degree in control science and engineering from the College 
of Electronics and Information Engineering, Tongji Univer-
sity, Shanghai, China, in 2024. He is currently a Lecturer 
with the School of Artificial Intelligence, Anhui University, 
Hefei, China. He has published more than 10 international 
articles in ranked journal. His research interests include 
deep reinforcement learning, computer vision, and robotics.
Jiang Wang received the B.E. degree in computer science 
and technology from the College of Information Engineer-
ing, Henan University of Science and Technology, Luoyang, 
China, in 2023. He is currently pursuing the M.E. degree 
with the School of Artificial Intelligence, Anhui University, 
Hefei, China. His research interests include machine learn-
ing, deep learning, reinforcement learning, robot navigation, 
and path planning.
Xing Wu received the B.Eng. and Ph.D. degrees in Mechani-
cal Engineering from Nanjing University of Aeronautics and 
Astronautics (NUAA), Nanjing, China, in 2004 and 2010, 
respectively. In 2010, he joined the College of Mechanical 
and Electrical Engineering, NUAA, where he is currently an 
associate professor. He was a visiting professor at the Centre 
for Intelligent Machines, McGill University, Canada, from 
Nov. 2016 to Nov. 2017. His research interests include: in-
telligent sensing and control; design, navigation and control 
of mobile robots; and coordinated control and intelligent 
scheduling of multi-robot systems.
Chaoxu Mu received the Ph.D. degree in control science 
and engineering from the School of Automation, Southeast 
University, Nanjing, China, in 2012. She was a Visiting 
Ph.D. Student with the Royal Melbourne Institute of Tech-
nology University, Melbourne, VIC, Australia, from 2010 to 
2011. She was a Post-Doctoral Fellow with the Department 
of Electrical, Computer and Biomedical Engineering, The 
University of Rhode Island, Kingston, RI, USA, from 2014 
to 2016. She is currently a Professor with the School of 
Electrical and Information Engineering, Tianjin University, 
Tianjin, China. She has authored more than 100 journals 
and conference papers, and co-authored two monographs. 
Her current research interests include nonlinear system 
control and optimization and adaptive and learning systems.
Changyin Sun received his B.S. degree from the Department 
of Mathematics, Sichuan University, Chengdu, in 1996, 
and M.S. and Ph.D. degrees in electrical engineering from 
Southeast University, Nanjing, China, in 2001 and 2003, 
respectively. He was a Post Doctoral Fellow with the De-
partment of Computer Science of Hong Kong in 2004. Since 
2007, he has been a Professor at the School of Automation, 
Southeast University. From 2022, he served as a member of 
the Standing Committee of the Party Committee and Vice 
President of Anhui University, Dean of the Future College, 
and Dean of the School of Artificial Intelligence. He served 
as a CAAI Fellow in 2023. He is the Associate Editor of IEEE 
Transactions on Neural Networks and Learning Systems, 
IEEE Neural Processing Letters, and IEEE/CAA Journal of 
Automatica Sinica. His current research interests include 
intelligent control, pattern recognition, machine vision, the-
ory and design of intelligent control systems, and deep 
reinforcement learning.
Engineering Applications of Artiϧcial Intelligence 167 (2026) 113779 
17 