

===== PAGE 1 =====
 
Contents lists available at ScienceDirect
Engineering Applications of Artificial Intelligence
journal homepage: www.elsevier.com/locate/engappai  
Research paper
Situation-aware deep reinforcement learning for unmanned aerial vehicle 
swarm navigation in dynamic multi-obstacle environments
Hongwei Zhao a, Ning Yu a, Yanyan Zhao a, Juan Feng b,∗, Yu Wang c
a School of Electronics and Information, Northwestern Polytechnical University, Xi’an, Shaanxi, 710129, China
b School of Aerospace Science and Technology, Xidian University, Xi’an, Shaanxi, 710071, China
c Yangtze normal university, Fuling, Chongqi, 408100, China
A R T I C L E  I N F O
Keywords:
Artificial intelligence implementation
Autonomous navigation application
Hybrid path planning framework
Situation awareness
Deep reinforcement learning
 A B S T R A C T
Autonomous navigation for unmanned aerial vehicle (UAV) swarms in dynamic, obstacle-rich environments 
remains a significant challenge due to unpredictable obstacle movements and complex swarm coordination 
requirements. Current approaches exhibit critical limitations: traditional algorithms suffer from high compu-
tational complexity and poor adaptability, while reinforcement learning (RL) methods often converge to local 
optima and require extensive training. To address these issues, this study proposes a hybrid AI framework 
integrating Situation Awareness Path Optimization (SAPO) with an enhanced Deep Deterministic Policy 
Gradient (DDPG), termed SAPO-DDPG. The SAPO module employs a channel-attention-enhanced CNN–LSTM 
network for real-time spatiotemporal danger perception, directly tackling environmental unpredictability. 
Concurrently, the enhanced DDPG incorporates adaptive multi-objective reward formulation and prioritized 
experience replay to mitigate local optima convergence and accelerate training. Evaluated on realistic 
simulation datasets, the proposed method consistently outperforms the state-of-the-art TSEB-DDPG baseline. It 
achieves shorter path lengths (individual: 2.1%, swarm: 4.2% reduction) while guaranteeing near-zero collision 
navigation, demonstrating robust autonomous operation for UAV swarms in complex, dynamic, and cluttered 
environments.
1. Introduction
The application of unmanned aerial vehicle (UAV) swarms is rapidly 
expanding into complex domains such as search and rescue, infrastruc-
ture inspection, and precision agriculture. The global UAV market size 
has grown from USD 9.3 billion in 2013 to nearly USD 60 billion in 
2023, reflecting a compound annual growth rate of 20.43% (Insights, 
2023). This growth underscores the critical need for robust autonomous 
navigation systems capable of operating in dynamic, Global Positioning 
System (GPS)-denied environments cluttered with moving obstacles. 
However, achieving efficient, collision-free path planning for multiple 
UAVs under these conditions remains a significant challenge, as tra-
ditional reliance on pre-existing maps or direct human control proves 
inadequate due to signal limitations, limited fields of view, and slow 
response times (Hu et al., 2024a; Jiang and Huang, 2023; Huang et al., 
2024; Shao et al., 2025; Sulieman et al., 2024; Rao et al., 2023; Fan 
et al., 2022).
Existing UAV swarm path planning methodologies can be broadly 
categorized, yet each exhibits critical limitations in dynamic set-
tings (Hu et al., 2024a; Jiang and Huang, 2023; Huang et al., 2024; 
∗ Corresponding author.
E-mail addresses: hongvi_zhao@126.com (H. Zhao), yuning715@mail.nwpu.edu.cn (N. Yu), zhaoyanyan@mail.nwpu.edu.cn (Y. Zhao), fengj@xidian.edu.cn 
(J. Feng), wangyu_827@foxmail.com (Y. Wang).
Shao et al., 2025; Sulieman et al., 2024; Rao et al., 2023; Fan et al., 
2022; Yu et al., 2023a; Tu et al., 2024; Pang et al., 2024; Wang et al., 
2024; Wen et al., 2023; Tang et al., 2024b; Hu et al., 2025; Zhong 
et al., 2025; Boulares et al., 2024; Zhou et al., 2024; Xu et al., 2023b; 
Zhang et al., 2024; Tang et al., 2024a; Bo et al., 2024; Fan, 2023; 
Zhang et al., 2023; Saeed et al., 2024; Ajith and Jolly, 2023; Zhu and 
Ye, 2025). Traditional algorithms (e.g., A*, Rapidly-exploring Random 
Trees (RRT), Artificial Potential Field (APF)), while effective in static 
environments, suffer from high computational complexity and inherent 
rigidity. For instance, improved A variants reduce computation time 
but fail to address nonlinear robustness degradation at high path 
costs (Hu et al., 2024b). Goal-biased RRT accelerates initial path 
discovery but lacks real-time dynamic obstacle response (Liu et al., 
2023), and bidirectional APF-RRT* exhibits weaknesses in multi-
objective coordination and dynamic avoidance (Xu et al., 2023a). 
Intelligent optimization techniques (e.g., Genetic Algorithm (GA), 
Particle Swarm Optimization (PSO), Ant Colony Optimization (ACO)) 
support multi-objective optimization (Yu et al., 2023a; Tu et al., 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.engappai.2025.113518
Received 10 May 2025; Received in revised form 13 October 2025; Accepted 8 December 2025
Engineering Applications of Artiϧcial Intelligence 165 (2026) 113518 
Available online 13 December 2025 
0952-1976/© 2025 Elsevier Ltd. All rights are reserved, including those for text and data mining, AI training, and similar technologies. 

===== PAGE 2 =====
H. Zhao et al.
Table 1
The performance comparison and applicability analysis of various methods.
 Methodologies Algorithm Dynamic 
response
Multi-objective 
optimization
Computational 
efficiency
Global Map 
Required
Application scenario  
 Traditional 
methods
Graph search(e.g. A*) Low Single-Objective Low Yes Static small-scale environment  
 Sampling(e.g. RRT) Medium Local optimization Medium No 3D exploration in unknown spaces 
 Artificial potential field Medium Local optimization High No Real-time collision avoidance  
 Intelligent
optimization
techniques
Genetic algorithm Low Multi-objective Medium No Offline multi-constraint planning  
 Particle swarm 
optimization
Medium Multi-objective High No Fast planning in static obstacles  
 Ant colony 
optimization
Medium Multi-objective Low No Multi-obstacle environment  
 Deep reinforcement
learning
DQN High Partial Support Low (training) No Dynamic unknown environments  
 PPO High Multi-Objective High (execution) No High-dynamic swarm coordination 
2024; Pang et al., 2024; Wang et al., 2024; Wen et al., 2023; 
Tang et al., 2024b; Hu et al., 2025; Zhong et al., 2025) but incur 
prohibitive computational overhead. Methods like the Expert GA (Fan 
et al., 2024) introduce decision instability, while ACO variants often 
neglect dynamic obstacles, creating safety vulnerabilities (Yu et al., 
2023b). Deep Reinforcement Learning (DRL) methods (Boulares et al., 
2024; Zhou et al., 2024; Xu et al., 2023b; Zhang et al., 2024; 
Tang et al., 2024a; Bo et al., 2024) enable adaptive planning but 
face unresolved challenges. Models based on Deep Q-Network and 
Artificial Potential Field (B-APFDQN) (Kong et al., 2023) improve 
training efficiency but suffer from ‘‘black-box’’ interpretability, and 
while recent algorithms like Soft Actor–Critic (SAC) (Zhao et al., 
2024; Zhong et al., 2024) and Twin Delayed Deep Deterministic 
policy gradient (TD3) (Luo et al., 2024) show promise, they often 
lack validation in dynamic swarm settings. The Three-Step Experience 
Buffer (TSEB) Deep Deterministic Policy Gradient (DDPG) model (Tian 
et al., 2024), though advanced, demonstrates severe generalization 
limitations. Collectively, these limitations manifest as three core 
deficiencies: weak real-time performance, inadequate global planning 
capability, and insufficient robustness in dynamic obstacle avoidance.
The characteristics and application scenarios associated with these 
methods are detailed in Table  1.
To overcome these limitations, this paper proposes a hybrid 
framework that integrates Situation Awareness Path Optimization 
(SAPO) (Yu et al., 2024) with an enhanced Deep Deterministic Policy 
Gradient (DDPG) algorithm, called SAPO-DDPG. The framework’s 
components are designed to address the specific shortcomings of 
prior works. First, a Situation Assessment Module eliminates global 
map dependency by constructing real-time spatiotemporal danger 
models through a channel-attention-enhanced Convolutional Neural 
Network with Long Short-Term Memory networks (CNN–LSTM) (Ku-
mar et al., 2024), directly enhancing real-time responsiveness. 
Second, a Multi-objective Reward Formulation combined with SAPO’s 
path optimization reconciles conflicting objectives (safety, efficiency, 
smoothness, swarm coordination), significantly boosting global plan-
ning capability. Third, Prioritized Experience Replay (Schaul et al., 
2016) and our novel Adaptive Harmonic Analysis of NDVI Time-Series 
(HANTs) Filtering (AHF) algorithm—an enhancement of the HANTs 
filter (Aliabad et al., 2024; Zhao et al., 2025)? — accelerate DDPG 
convergence and improve sample efficiency. For instance, in simulated 
tests within a 500 m × 300 m dynamic environment, this synergy 
enabled a 5-UAV swarm to achieve a mean path length of 1619.5 m 
with near-zero collision probability, outperforming the TSEB-DDPG 
baseline.
The main contributions of this work are summarized as follows:
We propose a novel hybrid architecture (SAPO-DDPG) that syner-
gistically combines real-time spatiotemporal perception with adaptive 
decision-making, actively preventing local optima convergence and 
ensuring globally smooth paths via integrated curve optimization.
We introduce a key algorithmic innovation by categorizing envi-
ronmental states before policy training, enabling dynamic model inte-
gration and continuous fine-tuning during deployment without costly 
policy network reinitialization.
Table 2
Table of notations in Section 2.
 Symbol Description  
 𝑥[𝑛] Original time series data  
 ̂ 𝑥[𝑛] Reconstructed time series after filtering  
 𝑥′[𝑛] Updated sequence after outlier replacement  
 𝑋(𝑒𝑗𝜔 ) Frequency domain representation after DTFT  
 𝐾 Error threshold for outlier detection  
 𝑁𝑒 Maximum number of deletion points per iteration  
 𝑓𝑛 Number of low-frequency components for reconstruction 
 𝐿(𝑥[𝑛]) Reconstruction loss function (Mean Squared Error)  
 𝑀 Maximum value of the sequence 𝑥[𝑛] (for normalization) 
 𝑁𝐼 Number of iterations until convergence  
 𝐿𝑓𝑛
Minimum loss value for frequency number 𝑓𝑛  
 𝛩 AHF parameter set: 𝛩 = [𝐾, 𝑁𝑒, 𝑓𝑛]  
 ∇𝛩𝐿 Gradient of loss with respect to AHF parameters  
We develop the novel Adaptive HANTs Filtering algorithm, which 
dynamically adjusts filtering parameters via iterative loss minimization, 
significantly boosting the accuracy of environmental state classification 
for safer path planning.
The remainder of this article is organized as follows. Section 2 
presents the structure of the AHF model. In Section 3, we discuss the 
underlying principles of the SAPO model and the DDPG algorithm. 
Section 4 outlines the hybrid path planning model for UAV swarms 
based on the SAPO-DDPG. Experiments and results are detailed in 
Section 5, while conclusions are provided in Section 6.
2. The structure of the AHF model
The notations used in this section are shown in Table  2.
The HANTs (Aliabad et al., 2024) is a filtering algorithm grounded 
in the harmonic analysis of time series, which combining smooth-
ing and filtering. This approach leverages the temporal and spatial 
characteristics of sensor data, connecting spatial distribution patterns 
with temporal variations. The core of the algorithm employs Fourier 
transform and least-squares fitting to decompose time-series data into 
a superposition of sinusoidal and cosine curves with distinct phases, 
frequencies, and amplitudes. A subset of these curves, which accurately 
captures the essential features of the original series, is selected to 
reconstruct the filtered time-series data.
As an enhancement of the Fast Fourier Transform (FFT), the HANTs 
algorithm can eliminate high-frequency noise and accommodates non-
uniformly sampled time-series data. Additionally, it serves three key 
functions: (1) gap-filling and reconstruction of missing data, (2) data 
compression, and (3) smoothing of irregular time-series.
The specific implementation process of the algorithm is outlined as 
follows:
i. A Fourier transform 𝐷𝑇 𝐹 𝑇{𝑥[𝑛]} is applied to the time series of 
each pixel point. As shown in Eq.  (1): 
𝑋(𝑒𝑗𝜔 ) = 𝐷𝑇 𝐹 𝑇{𝑥[𝑛]} =
∞∑
𝑛=−∞
𝑥[𝑛]𝑒−𝑗𝜔𝑛 (1)
Engineering Applications of Artiϧcial Intelligence 165 (2026) 113518 
2 

===== PAGE 3 =====
H. Zhao et al.
Fig. 1. The algorithm flow chart of the HANTs filter model.
Table 3
Filtering algorithms comparison.
 Algorithm Advantages Disadvantages  
 Moving Average – Simple implementation 
– Low computation cost
– Causes phase lag 
– Poor step response
 
 Exponential Smoothing – Weighted for recent data 
– Computationally efficient
– Parameter tuning needed 
– Lag for abrupt changes
 
 Kalman Filter – Optimal linear estimation 
– Combines prediction/update
– Needs accurate model 
– Degrades for nonlinear systems
 
 Wavelet Filter – Time–frequency localization 
– Preserves signal features
– Basis selection critical 
– Computationally intensive
 
 HANTS Filter – Handles non-uniform sampling 
– Reconstructs missing data
– Parameter setting sensitive 
– Computationally heavy
 
 Particle Filter – Handles nonlinear systems 
– Suitable for complex distributions
– Very high computation cost 
– Particle degeneracy problem
 
 Median Filter – Excellent for impulse noise 
– Preserves signal edges
– Ineffective for Gaussian noise 
– Causes signal distortion
 
ii. Several low-frequency components are selected for inverse
Fourier transform 𝐼𝐷𝑇 𝐹 𝑇 {𝑋(𝑒𝑗𝜔 )}, which produces a new sequence. As 
shown in Eq.  (2). The contribution coefficients of each sine or cosine 
function in the reconstructed original data set are obtained through 
least squares curve fitting. 
∧
𝑥[𝑛] = 𝐼𝐷𝑇 𝐹 𝑇 {𝑋(𝑒𝑗𝜔 )} = 1
2𝜋 ∫ 𝜋
−𝜋 𝑋(𝑒𝑗𝜔 )𝑒𝑗𝜔𝑛 𝑑𝜔 (2)
iii. The difference between the original time series 𝑥[𝑛] and the 
reconstructed series 
∧
𝑥[𝑛] is then calculated. If this difference exceeds 
a predetermined threshold 𝐾, the point is identified as an outlier, re-
moved from the original sequence, and replaced with the corresponding 
value from the new sequence. As shown in Eq.  (3). 
𝑥′[𝑛] =
⎧
⎪
⎨
⎪⎩
∧
𝑥[𝑛], if | 𝑥[𝑛] −
∧
𝑥[𝑛]| > 𝐾
𝑥[𝑛], if | 𝑥[𝑛] −
∧
𝑥[𝑛]| < 𝐾
(3)
iv. This process is repeated for the original sequence of changes until 
no cloud-contaminated points remain or a predetermined end condition 
is met.
These equations form the HANTs filtering core: Equation (1) per-
forms spectral decomposition, Eq. (2) reconstructs from low frequen-
cies, and Eq.  (3) detects and replaces outliers. This iterative process 
removes noise while preserving essential signal features.
The algorithm flowchart is shown in Fig.  1. Conceptually, HANTs 
effectively approximates the original data using a limited set of low-
frequency components, achieving a balance between eliminating sig-
nificant noise and preserving essential features.
Table  3 shows the advantages and disadvantages of the commonly 
used filtering algorithms at present (Zhao et al., 2025).
The HANTs filter belongs to harmonic analysis-based smoothing 
techniques and differs from conventional static filters (e.g., moving 
average) in three key aspects::
• Non-uniform sampling: Unlike Fourier transforms requiring
equidistant intervals, HANTs handles irregular time-series data 
through least-squares fitting, critical for UAVs with intermittent 
sensor updates.
• Feature preservation: While static low-pass filters indiscrimi-
nately suppress high frequencies, HANTs selectively reconstructs 
components through harmonic superposition, preserving abrupt 
environmental changes.
• Data imputation: HANTs inherently repairs missing data (com-
mon in GPS-denied areas) by replacing outliers with fitted values, 
whereas static filters require separate preprocessing.
A limitation of the standard HANTs filter is its reliance on fixed 
parameters during iteration, which demands accurate initial settings 
and cannot adapt to varying filtering requirements across different 
processing stages. To address this, we propose the Adaptive HANTs Fil-
tering (AHF) model, which enhances dynamic adjustment and iteration 
efficiency by replacing static parameters with adaptive, functionally 
determined equivalents.
First, we introduce a loss function to calculate the difference be-
tween the sequence before and after the iteration. As shown in Eq.  (4): 
𝐿(𝑥[𝑛]) = 1
𝑛
𝑛∑
𝑖=1
(𝑥′[𝑖] − 𝑥[𝑖])2 (4)
From this, the error threshold 𝐾𝑖 can be defined as shown in Eq.  (5): 
𝐾 = 1
𝑀
√
𝐿(𝑥[𝑛]) (5)
where 𝑀 is the maximum value of the sequence 𝑥[𝑛]. The maximum 
number of deletion points 𝑁𝑒 can be obtained by calculating the 
difference between the loss function in two successive iterations, as 
shown in Eq.  (6): 
Engineering Applications of Artiϧcial Intelligence 165 (2026) 113518 
3 

===== PAGE 4 =====
H. Zhao et al.
𝑁𝑒𝑖 =
𝐿𝑖−1(𝑥[𝑛])𝑁𝑒(𝑖−1)
𝐿𝑖(𝑥[𝑛]) (6)
where 𝑁𝑒𝑖 is the maximum number of deletion points in the 𝑖th iter-
ation, 𝐿𝑖(𝑥[𝑛]) is the loss function in the 𝑖th iteration, 𝑁𝑒(𝑖−1) is the 
maximum number of deletion points in the (𝑖 − 1) th iteration, and 
𝐿𝑖−1(𝑥[𝑛]) is the loss function in the (𝑖 − 1) th iteration. Finally, the 
low frequency number 𝑓𝑛 can be updated based on the trend of the 
reconstruction loss, as shown in Eq.  (7): 
𝑓𝑛+ =
⎧
⎪
⎨
⎪⎩
0, if 𝐿𝑖−1(𝑥[𝑛])−𝐿𝑖(𝑥[𝑛])
𝐿𝑖−2(𝑥[𝑛])−𝐿𝑖−1(𝑥[𝑛]) > 0
−1, if 𝐿𝑖−1(𝑥[𝑛])−𝐿𝑖(𝑥[𝑛])
𝐿𝑖−2(𝑥[𝑛])−𝐿𝑖−1(𝑥[𝑛]) ≤ 0
(7)
When 𝑓𝑛 changes, the minimum loss function of the optimal se-
quence corresponding to 𝑓𝑛 compared with the original sequence will 
be recorded and recorded as 𝐿𝑓𝑛 . When 𝐿𝑓𝑛 cannot obtain the minimum 
value when 𝑓𝑛 changes, the iteration ends, and the optimal sequence 
corresponding to the minimum value of 𝐿𝑓𝑛 is taken as the output 
result.
The AHF enhancement introduces dynamic parameter adaptation. 
Eqs. (5)–(7) automatically adjust filtering parameters based on re-
construction loss, eliminating manual tuning while balancing noise 
suppression and feature preservation across processing stages.
This method satisfies optimization equivalence.
The parameter update rules (Eq. (5)–(7)) implement stochastic gra-
dient descent (Eq. (8)): 
∇𝛩𝐿 =
[
𝜕𝐿
𝜕𝐾 , 𝜕𝐿
𝜕𝑁𝑒
, 𝜕𝐿
𝜕𝑓𝑛
] 𝑇
, 𝛩 = [𝐾, 𝑁𝑒, 𝑓𝑛] (8)
Minimizing reconstruction loss 𝐿(𝑥[𝑛]) (Eq. (4)) ensures AHF converges 
to the optimal filter configuration.
The relationship between the parameters is shown in Fig.  2.
In comparison to the original algorithm, the AHF model enhances 
iteration by gradually updating parameters throughout the process. 
This not only allows for the preservation of more feature information 
during the initial iterations but also accelerates the convergence speed 
of the iterations. Additionally, it minimizes the impact of human factors 
on the model.
The proposed AHF model eliminates manual tuning by introduc-
ing dynamic parameter adaptation, contrasting with existing adaptive 
filters:
• Vs. Kalman variants: While adaptive Kalman filters adjust noise 
covariance matrices, they assume linear dynamics (violated by 
UAV maneuvers). AHF’s loss-driven updates are model-agnostic.
• Vs. wavelet denoising: Wavelet methods adapt thresholds per 
frequency band but cannot impute missing data. AHF jointly 
optimizes smoothing and gap-filling.
• Vs. RL-based filters: Reinforcement learning adapters incur high 
latency. AHF’s closed-form updates ensure real-time operation 
(< 1 ms per iteration).
Therefore, the AHF model can serve as an independent and versatile 
module suitable for a broader range of time-series smoothing and 
filtering applications.
3. The SAPO model and the DDPG algorithm
The notations used in this section are shown in Tables  4 and 5.
3.1. The improved SAPO model
The SAPO model is a path optimization method that leverages 
situation awareness and assessment techniques to integrate information 
effectively. It evaluates path quality through spatio-temporal analysis 
and ultimately employs a curve fitting method to optimize the path. 
This approach challenges the conventional shorter-path-better notion 
Fig. 2. The relationship between parameters in AHF model.
Table 4
Table of notations in Section 3.1.
 Symbol Description  
 𝐹𝑐 , 𝐹𝑠, 𝐹 ′
𝑐 Feature maps in channel attention mechanism  
 𝐶, 𝑆 Channel dimension and reduced dimension in attention  
 𝑓 (𝑥) Gaussian probability density function for danger field  
 𝐿(𝜇, 𝜎2) Likelihood function for parameter estimation  
 𝑙(𝜇, 𝜎2) Log-likelihood function  
 ̂ 𝜇, ̂ 𝜎2 Maximum likelihood estimates of Gaussian parameters  
 𝐹 Path quality evaluation function  
 𝑙 Path length in quality evaluation  
 𝑁 Number of break points along the path  
 𝜃𝑥 Turning angle at break point 𝑥  
 𝜌 Path feasibility probability  
 𝐷(𝑣) Variance of average passing speed  
 𝑛𝑢 Minimum number of feasible cross sections  
 𝑚′ Number of UAV members in swarm subset  
 𝜔𝑗 Weight parameters in path quality function  
 𝑍 Path quality evaluation coefficient for multi-bend scenarios 
 𝑣0 Initial speed at area entry  
 𝑣𝑚 Maximum UAV flight speed  
 𝑟 Maximum radius of curvature  
 𝜑 Endpoint tangent angle  
 𝑘 Curvature (𝑘 = 1∕𝑟)  
 𝐿 Curve length in cyclotron curve  
 𝐴 Constant in cyclotron curve equation 𝑘𝐿 = 𝐴2  
by considering multiple objectives including path length, smoothness, 
passage time, and maximum turning angle. Additionally, the method 
facilitates the integration of multi-source information, allowing data 
from different sensors to be cohesively combined, thereby providing 
more comprehensive support for path planning.
The SAPO model consists of two primary components: the situ-
ational assessment module, which is responsible for the integration 
Engineering Applications of Artiϧcial Intelligence 165 (2026) 113518 
4 

===== PAGE 5 =====
H. Zhao et al.
Table 5
Table of notations in Section 3.2.
 Symbol Description  
 𝜋(𝑠| 𝜃𝜋 ) Actor policy network  
 𝑄(𝑠, 𝑎| 𝜃𝑄) Critic value network  
 𝜋′(𝑠| 𝜃𝜋′
) Target actor network  
 𝑄′(𝑠, 𝑎| 𝜃𝑄′
) Target critic network  
 𝜃𝜋 , 𝜃𝑄 Online network parameters  
 𝜃𝜋′
, 𝜃𝑄′
Target network parameters  
 𝛼 Learning rate  
 𝛾 Discount factor  
 𝑁 Number of training samples in batch  
 𝐿𝑐 Critic loss function  
 𝑦𝑖 Target Q-value  
 𝑅 Overall reward function  
 𝑅𝑖 Sub-objective reward functions  
 𝜔𝑖 Weight parameters in reward function  
 𝛿𝑗 TD-error for experience 𝑗  
 𝑃𝑗 Sampling probability in prioritized experience replay 
of information, and the path optimization module, which focuses on 
optimizing processes. Each of these components is detailed in the 
subsequent sections.
3.1.1. Situation assessment module
Situation assessment encompasses three essential components: sit-
uational awareness, situational understanding, and situational predic-
tion. Situational awareness involves gathering environmental infor-
mation, such as maps and location data, through various sensors. 
Situational understanding focuses on analyzing this data and moni-
toring movement patterns. Finally, situational prediction merges this 
understanding with the capability to foresee future changes, applying 
constraints to maintain stability and safety.
Among them, situational awareness and understanding encompasses 
three primary components: information acquisition, target recognition, 
and target localization. Information acquisition primarily relies on vi-
sual input, leveraging multi-source fusion to generate a comprehensive 
map and location data essential for target recognition. Target recogni-
tion involves matching features such as contours and textures in image 
data to identify targets once a predetermined matching threshold is 
achieved. Finally, target localization employs multiple sensors to ascer-
tain the target’s position and movement by integrating map information 
with positional data.
The original model employs a CNN–LSTM architecture (Kumar 
et al., 2024) for feature extraction and processing. This hybrid network 
synergistically combines the CNN’s strength in extracting local spatial 
features with the LSTM’s proficiency in modeling temporal dependen-
cies and managing long-term memory in time-series data. To enhance 
the efficiency of feature extraction, we have refined the original model 
by introducing a channel attention mechanism following the LSTM. 
This enhancement allows the network to focus on and learn more 
relevant features. The specific structure of the CNN–LSTM model is 
illustrated in Fig.  3.
The CNN component comprises input normalization (Eq.  (9)), con-
volutional layers with ReLU activation (Eq.  (10)), pooling layers for 
dimensionality reduction, and fully connected layers for feature inte-
gration. As illustrated in Fig.  4, after undergoing several convolution 
operations, the amount of information extracted from a single element 
in the data significantly increases. 
𝑥′
𝑖𝑗 =
𝑥𝑖𝑗
max {𝑥11, … , 𝑥1𝑛, 𝑥21, … , 𝑥𝑛𝑛} (9)
𝑥𝑖𝑗 is the original data and 𝑥′
𝑖𝑗 is the normalized data. 
ReLU(𝑥𝑖𝑗 ) =
{
0, if 𝑥𝑖𝑗 < 0
𝑥𝑖𝑗 , if 𝑥𝑖𝑗 ≥ 0
(10)
The LSTM network (Fig.  5) processes temporal sequences through 
gate mechanisms (input, forget, output gates) to capture essential long-
term dependencies in sequences.
Recognizing that different features contribute differently to the 
model’s performance, we incorporate a channel attention mechanism 
to enhance the network’s ability to focus on and learn more relevant 
features. This module is illustrated in Fig.  6. Initially, a feature map 
𝐹𝑐 = 𝐶 ×1× 1 is generated using global mean pooling. Subsequently, we 
derive the feature 𝐹𝑠 = 𝑆 ×1 by reducing the dimensionality of 𝐹𝑐 . Once 
we have the two-dimensional feature map, we apply convolutional 
dependencies to capture the interactions among each channel and its 
neighbors, resulting in the transformed feature map 𝐹 ′
𝑐 = 𝐶 × 1 ×
1. Finally, we obtain the weight of each channel using the Sigmoid 
function.
The CNN–LSTM model is effective to achieve situational awareness 
and comprehension of the surrounding environment. Building on the 
perceived outcomes, further development of situation prediction is 
essential. This process primarily encompasses a classification problem 
and the resolution of a probability distribution issue. The environment 
can be categorized into three areas: safe, dangerous, and unknown. The 
safe zone represents areas that can be traversed freely, whereas the dan-
gerous zone indicates regions that are obstructed or lack the conditions 
for passage. Due to observational limitations, certain areas cannot be 
definitively classified as safe, leading to their designation as unknown 
areas. To quantify the reliability of these unknown regions, we can 
define the security level of each point within them using a probability 
density function. Additionally, the passability of the unknown regions 
can be represented through a probability distribution function.
There is a clear relationship between the safety level of the un-
known zone and its distance from the danger zone. As this distance 
increases, the likelihood of encountering danger diminishes gradually. 
Consequently, it can be assumed that the probability of danger and the 
corresponding distance are normally distributed, as illustrated in Eq. 
(11): 
𝑓 (𝑥) = 1√
2𝜋𝜎
𝑒
− (𝑥−𝜇)2
2𝜎2 (11)
where 𝜎 is the scale parameter and 𝜇 is the positional parameter. 
This Gaussian model probabilistically represents danger distribution 
around obstacles. Parameters 𝜇 and 𝜎 control the danger concentra-
tion and spatial decay, creating smooth gradients that facilitate stable 
optimization rather than binary constraints.
However, the impact of various obstacles on the surrounding envi-
ronment varies, indicating that the parameters within the probability 
density function are not uniform. Therefore, it is essential to estimate 
these parameters based on available information in order to derive the 
appropriate probability distribution function. We employ the maximum 
likelihood estimation method for parameter estimation. Initially, we 
formulate the maximum likelihood function, as illustrated in Eq.  (12): 
𝐿(𝜇, 𝜎2) =
𝑛∏
𝑖−1
1√
2𝜋𝜎
𝑒
− (𝑥𝑖 −𝜇)2
2𝜎2 (12)
Then take the logarithm of the likelihood function to get the log-
likelihood function 𝑙(𝜇, 𝜎2) and take the derivative of it, as shown in Eq. 
(13)–(14): 
𝜕𝑙(𝜇, 𝜎2)
𝜕𝜇 = 𝜕 ln 𝐿(𝜇, 𝜎2)
𝜕𝜇 = 1
𝜎2
𝑛∑
𝑖−1
(𝑥𝑖 − 𝜇) (13)
𝜕𝑙(𝜇, 𝜎2)
𝜕𝜎 2 = 𝜕 ln 𝐿(𝜇, 𝜎2)
𝜕𝜎 2 = − 𝑛
2𝜎2 + 1
2(𝜎2)2
𝑛∑
𝑖−1
(𝑥𝑖 − 𝜇)2 (14)
Set the derivative of the log-likelihood function to 0 to obtain the 
sample mean 
∧
𝜇 and sample variance 
∧
𝜎2, as shown in Eq.  (15): 
⎧
⎪
⎪
⎨
⎪
⎪⎩
∧
𝜇 = ̄ 𝑥= 1
𝑛
∑𝑛
𝑖=1 𝑥𝑖
∧
𝜎2 = 1
𝑛
∑𝑛
𝑖=1(𝑥𝑖 − ̄ 𝑥)2
(15)
Engineering Applications of Artiϧcial Intelligence 165 (2026) 113518 
5 

===== PAGE 6 =====
H. Zhao et al.
Fig. 3. The structure of the CNN–LSTM model with the attention mechanism.
Fig. 4. Performing multiple convolution operations on the data.
By following the aforementioned steps, the target parameters can 
be estimated from the sample data, allowing for the derivation of 
the corresponding probability density function. This enables the as-
sessment of safety levels at various locations within the region, lead-
ing to a comprehensive prediction and analysis of the environmental 
conditions.
3.1.2. Path optimization module
In the path optimization problem, two of the most common chal-
lenges are the multi-path problem and the multi-bend problem. The 
former requires a comprehensive evaluation of various paths to identify 
the optimal route, while the latter involves determining the most suit-
able bending angle and bending time. Both of these challenges typically 
represent multi-objective optimization problems, where there can be 
inherent conflicts among the objectives. As a result, path optimization 
demands high-performance standards. These two problems will be 
discussed separately in the following paragraphs.
In order to quantify the path quality of different paths, we propose 
different path quality evaluation functions for different problems.
In a multi-path scenario, the efficiency of a UAV swarm navigating 
through a path is generally influenced by several factors. These include 
the path length 𝑙, the number of break points 𝑁 along the path, the 
angles at each break point 𝜃𝑥 (where 𝑥 = 1 , 2, 3, … , 𝑁), the path 
feasibility 𝜌, the variance 𝐷(𝑣) of the average passing speed 𝑣 of the 
UAVs, and the minimum number of feasible cross sections of the UAV, 
denoted as 𝑛𝑢, within the path feasibility region. Therefore, for a UAV 
swarm consisting of 𝑚′ members, the quality evaluation function of the 
path can be expressed as shown in Eq.  (16): 
𝐹 = 𝜔1𝑒−𝑙 − 𝜔2
𝑁∑
𝑖=1
| 𝜃𝑖| − 𝜔3𝜌 − 𝜔4𝐷(𝑣) − 𝜔5( 𝑚′
𝑛𝑢
)2 (16)
where 𝜌 is the probability of being in the danger zone; 𝜔𝑗 , 𝑗 = 1, 2, 3, 4, 5
are the weight parameters, which are related to the characteristics of 
the UAV and flight requirements and are non-negative real numbers. 
This multi-objective function 𝐹 integrates five critical navigation as-
pects: path length, turning smoothness, safety, speed consistency, and 
swarm coordination. The weights 𝜔𝑗 reflect Pareto-optimal tradeoffs 
among these competing objectives. Therefore, the passage efficiency 
of different paths is analyzed according to the path quality evaluation 
function.
For a UAV swarm that operates as a unified entity along a des-
ignated path, path optimization involves assessing the optimization 
degree of each path at the current scale and selecting the one with 
the highest optimization degree. In the case of a decentralized UAV 
swarm, the journey from the starting point to the endpoint can be 
represented as a connected graph comprising multiple nodes. The 
optimal extremum 𝐹𝑘 between each node, along with the corresponding 
maximum passable number 𝑛𝑘 (where 𝑘 = 1 , 2, … , 𝑀, and 𝑀 denotes 
the total number of subsets), is calculated to determine the maximum 
Engineering Applications of Artiϧcial Intelligence 165 (2026) 113518 
6 

===== PAGE 7 =====
H. Zhao et al.
Fig. 5. The mathematical model of LSTM.
Fig. 6. The structure of the channel attention mechanism.
value of the optimization function, as illustrated in Eq.  (17): 
max 1
𝑛
𝑀∑
𝑘=1
𝑁𝑘𝐹𝑘
s.t.
⎧
⎪
⎪
⎪
⎨
⎪
⎪
⎪⎩
∑𝑀
𝑘=1 𝑛𝑘 = 𝑛𝑢
𝑀 ≤ 𝑛𝑢
𝑛𝑘 is a positive integer.
(17)
In the calculation process, whenever a set of {𝐹𝑘, 𝑛𝑘} is established, 
it is essential to disconnect the corresponding limit path. Subsequently, 
a new optimal combination {𝐹𝑘+1, 𝑛𝑘+1} must be recalculated until 
the condition ∑𝑀
𝑘=1 𝑛𝑘 = 𝑛𝑢 is met, or until there is no feasible path 
between the starting point and the endpoint. If the latter occurs, we 
must determine the total traffic 𝑛𝑚𝑎𝑥, after completing a round of 
optimal calculations. From there, we can compute the remainder 𝑛′
𝑢 =
𝑚𝑜𝑑(𝑛𝑢, 𝑛𝑚𝑎𝑥), ultimately allowing us to calculate the optimal planning 
when 𝑛𝑢 = 𝑛′
𝑢.
In a multi-bend scenario, the path of a UAV can be categorized 
into two segments: the turning area path and the straight area path. 
Typically, the straight area path does not require optimization, which 
means the focus is primarily on optimizing the turning area path. For 
a specific turning area, the goal is to develop an optimized path that 
outperforms the existing one. To facilitate the evaluation of the degree 
of path optimization, we define a quality evaluation coefficient 𝑍 for 
a path of length 𝑙, as expressed in Eq.  (18): 
⎧
⎪
⎨
⎪⎩
𝑍 = 𝐹𝑙(𝜌)(𝑙𝑒−𝑙 − 𝜔1𝑣0 sin 𝜃𝑧 − 𝜔2
𝑣2
𝑚
𝑟 − 𝜔3 sin 𝜑)
𝐹𝑙(𝜌) < 1
(18)
The function 𝐹𝑙(𝜌), which is given by the situation assessment 
model, represents the probability of a path with length 𝑙 within the 
constrained domain. The weight parameters are denoted as 𝜔𝑗 , 𝑗 =
1, 2, 3. The variable 𝑣0 indicates the initial speed at which the UAV 
enters the area; this speed is influenced by factors related to the UAV 
swarm and flight requirements, and is defined as a non-negative real 
number. Meanwhile, 𝑣𝑚 represents the maximum flight speed of the 
UAV. The angle 𝜃𝑧 denotes the angle between the tangent line at the 
start of the path and the initial direction of the UAV’s velocity. The 
maximum radius of curvature for the path is represented by 𝑟, and 𝜑
is the angle between the tangent line at the end of one path section 
and the tangent line at the beginning of the subsequent section. By 
calculating the quality evaluation coefficient for the path, we can assess 
whether it has been optimized effectively.
Upon examining the expression, it is evident that in order for 𝑍
to reach its maximum value, the path length 𝑙, the tangent angle 
𝜃𝑧, and the endpoint angle 𝜑 must be minimized. Additionally, the 
maximum radius of curvature should be maximized. Clearly, achieving 
an included angle of 0◦ can be accomplished relatively easily. However, 
optimizing the curvature radius and path length is more complex, as 
they are inherently tied to the specific shape of the curve. To address 
this challenge, a cyclotron curve has been introduced to approximate 
the curve. This type of curve features a curvature that is proportional 
to the distance traversed along it, and its equation can be expressed 
as Eq.  (19): 
𝑘𝐿 = 𝐴2 (19)
where 𝑘 represent the curvature, defined as 𝑘 = 1∕ 𝑟, where 𝑟 is the 
radius of curvature. The length of the curve is denoted as 𝐿, and ‘‘A’’ is 
a constant. This cyclotron curve relation 𝑘𝐿 = 𝐴2 links curvature and 
path length for turning optimization. It enables analytical derivation 
of optimal bend geometry, balancing path shortness and navigability. 
Consequently, the length of the curve can be related to the radius of 
curvature, allowing the quality evaluation coefficient to be streamlined 
into Eq.  (20): 
𝑍 = 𝑙𝑒−𝑙 − 𝜔2
𝑣2
𝑚
𝐴2 𝑙 (20)
Taking the derivative of both sides of the equation with respect to 
𝑙, and setting the derivative equal to 0, yields Eq.  (21): 
𝑍′ = (1 − 𝑙)𝑒−𝑙 − 𝜔2
𝑣2
𝑚
𝐴2 = 0 (21)
According to this equation, we can determine the value of 𝑙. If 
𝑙 does not have a solution, it indicates that the optimal path is the 
Engineering Applications of Artiϧcial Intelligence 165 (2026) 113518 
7 

===== PAGE 8 =====
H. Zhao et al.
one with the largest angle in the turning region. Conversely, if 𝑙 has 
a solution, the function 𝑓 (𝑙) = (1 − 𝑙)𝑒−𝑙 is strictly monotone, and 
the solution corresponds to the maximum point. Thus, the cyclotron 
curve associated with 𝑙 represents the desired optimal path. From this 
analysis, each turning region can be optimized individually to derive 
the final optimization path.
Combining the above two kinds of optimization methods, the path 
optimization task of different scenarios can be completed.
3.2. The DDPG algorithm
The DDPG algorithm is an actor–critic method designed for contin-
uous state and action spaces. When compared to similar reinforcement 
learning algorithms, DDPG exhibits lower sample requirements and 
demonstrates superior performance in scenarios with limited data, 
when contrasted with the PPO algorithm. Although the DDPG al-
gorithm has less exploration capability than the SAC algorithm, it 
converges more rapidly, making it particularly suitable for situations 
where timeliness is prioritized over precision. The following sections 
will delve into the algorithm from four key perspectives: the actor, the 
critic, the reward function, and the experience replay mechanism.
3.2.1. Actor
The actor is utilized to define the policy function, which primarily 
focuses on generating the output action 𝑎𝑡 based on the current state 
𝑠𝑡. This involves both the target policy network and the online policy 
network, which are updated alternately. Initially, the parameters 𝜃𝑢 and 
𝜃𝑢′
 are set to be equal. The update process for the parameters of the 
online policy network is illustrated in Eq.  (22): 
▽𝜃𝑢 𝐽 ≈ 1
𝑁
∑
𝑖
▽𝑎𝑄(𝑠, 𝑎| 𝜃𝑄)▽𝜃𝑢 𝑢(𝑠| 𝜃𝑢)| 𝑠=𝑠𝑖,𝑎=𝑢(𝑠𝑖) (22)
where 𝑁 is the number of single training samples and 𝑄 is the function 
of state action value; 𝜃𝑄 is the online Q network parameter; 𝜃𝑢 is the 
online policy network parameter. The target policy network is updated 
at regular intervals, as shown in Eq.  (23): 
𝜃𝑢′
= 𝛼𝜃 𝑢 + (1 − 𝛼)𝜃𝑢′
(23)
where 𝛼 is the learning rate.
3.2.2. Critic
The critic is employed to approximate the state–action value func-
tion, which encompasses both the target Q network and the online 
Q network that are updated alternately. Initially, the parameters 𝜃𝑄
and 𝜃𝑄′
 are set to be equal. Once experience samples (𝑠𝑖, 𝑎𝑖, 𝑟𝑖, 𝑠𝑖+1) are 
obtained from the experience buffer, the online Q network is updated 
by minimizing the loss value 𝐿𝑐. The method for calculating 𝐿𝑐 is 
detailed in Eq.  (24): 
𝐿𝑐 = 1
𝑁
∑
𝑖
(𝑦𝑖 − 𝑄(𝑠𝑖, 𝑎𝑖| 𝜃𝑄))2 (24)
The calculation method of 𝑦𝑖 is shown in Eq.  (25): 
𝑦𝑖 = 𝑟𝑖 + 𝛾𝑄 ′(𝑠𝑖+1, 𝑢′(𝑠𝑖+1| 𝜃𝑢′
)| 𝜃𝑄′
) (25)
Among them, 𝑟𝑖 is the single step reward value; 𝛾 is the discount factor; 
𝑄′ is the target state action value function; 𝑢′ is the target strategy 
function; 𝜃𝑢′
 is the network parameter of the target strategy; 𝜃𝑄′
 is the 
target Q network parameter. Similarly, the target Q network is updated 
every once in a while, as shown in Eq.  (26): 
𝜃𝑄′
= 𝛼𝜃 𝑄 + (1 − 𝛼)𝜃𝑄′
(26)
The actor network and the critic network alternate and iterate, 
thereby gradually improving the decision-making performance of the 
model.
3.2.3. Reward function
The reward function is a crucial component in reinforcement learn-
ing tasks, as it guides the updating of network parameters for both 
actors and critics. However, designing an effective reward function 
poses significant challenges. A well-structured reward function can 
enhance model performance, while a poorly conceived one may result 
in subpar outcomes or even prevent the model from converging, ulti-
mately wasting computational resources. This challenge is particularly 
evident in multi-objective optimization problems, where it is essential 
not only to create an appropriate reward function for each objective but 
also to assess the relative importance of each objective in the overall 
framework.
To create an appropriate reward function for a multi-objective 
optimization problem, it is typically effective to first establish a reward 
function for a single objective. Following this, a weighted integration 
of the single objective reward function can be used to develop the 
comprehensive reward function. In this process, the weight values 
often require determination through experimentation and analysis. The 
overall structure of the reward function 𝑅 is represented in Eq.  (27): 
𝑅 =
𝑛∑
𝑖=1
𝜔𝑖𝑅𝑖 (27)
where 𝑛 is the number of targets; 𝜔𝑖 are the weight parameters; 𝑅𝑖 are 
the reward functions for sub-objective.
3.2.4. Experience replay mechanism
The experience replay mechanism utilizes a fixed-size memory space 
to store past experiences, randomly selecting a predetermined number 
of these experiences at a time to update the network. This approach has 
the effect of significantly diminishing the temporal correlation between 
the experiences in replay, as it blends both old and new experiences 
for network updates. Despite this, the mechanism operates under the 
premise that all experiences in the pool are equally significant, al-
lowing for an even training of the network through sampling from 
the experience pool. However, this assumption does not align with 
the principles of human learning. In human learning, experiences that 
are successful or associated with substantial losses tend to provide 
more valuable lessons. With this perspective in mind, we modified the 
original uniform random replay mechanism to employ a priority replay 
mechanism. When an experience 𝑗 is acquired, we can calculate its time 
difference error (TD-error) 𝛿𝑗 , as detailed in Eq.  (28): 
𝛿𝑗 = 𝑟(𝑠𝑡, 𝑎𝑡) + 𝛾𝑄 ′(𝑠𝑡+𝑎, 𝑎𝑡+1, 𝑤) − 𝑄(𝑠𝑡, 𝑎𝑡, 𝑤) (28)
where 𝑄′(𝑠𝑡+𝑎, 𝑎𝑡+1, 𝑤) is the target action-value network parameterized 
by 𝑤. The TD-error 𝛿𝑗 quantifies prediction surprise in our prioritized 
replay. High-error experiences indicate greater learning potential, al-
lowing focused training on the most informative samples to accelerate 
convergence. Based on this, the reply probability of every experience 
can be expressed as Eq.  (29): 
𝑃𝑗 =
| 𝛿𝑗 |
∑
𝑘 | 𝛿𝑘| (29)
By establishing varying priorities, it becomes possible to replay 
more beneficial experiences with greater frequency. This approach 
enhances training efficiency and accelerates the convergence process.
4. The hybrid path planning model for UAV swarms based on the 
SAPO-DDPG
The notations used in this section are shown in Table  6.
To address the path planning challenge for UAV swarms in dy-
namic multi-obstacle environments, we propose the SAPO-DDPG hybrid 
model. This framework integrates the DDPG algorithm as the core 
decision-maker, the SAPO model for situational information fusion and 
path refinement, and the AHF algorithm for sensor data preprocessing.
Engineering Applications of Artiϧcial Intelligence 165 (2026) 113518 
8 

===== PAGE 9 =====
H. Zhao et al.
Table 6
Table of notations in Section 4.
 Symbol Description  
 𝑆𝑡 Raw sensor data stream at time 𝑡  
 𝑝𝑠, 𝑝𝑔 Start and goal positions  
 𝑈 UAV swarm: 𝑈 = {𝑢1, 𝑢2, … , 𝑢𝑁 }  
 𝑃 ∗ Optimized paths: 𝑃 ∗ = {𝑃 ∗
1 , 𝑃 ∗
2 , … , 𝑃 ∗
𝑁 }  
 𝑅1 Safety reward function  
 𝑅2 Motion stability reward function  
 𝑅3 Traffic efficiency reward function  
 𝑅4 Swarm coordination reward function  
 𝐷𝑖 Shortest distance between UAV 𝑖 and danger area  
 𝐷𝑠 Safety distance threshold: 𝐷𝑠 =
𝑣2
max
2𝑎 + 𝐷𝑐  
 𝐷𝑐 Collision threshold (based on sensor accuracy)  
 | 𝑎𝑡| Acceleration magnitude at time 𝑡  
 𝜃𝑣𝑎𝑡 Angle between velocity and acceleration vectors  
 𝑇 Time spent in the mission area  
 𝐿 Path length  
 𝐰 Gaussian noise vector: 𝐰 = [𝑤𝑥, 𝑤𝑦, 𝑤𝜃 ]𝑇 ∼  (0, 𝛴𝑑 ) 
 𝛴𝑑 Noise covariance matrix: diag(0.12, 0.12, 0.052)  
 𝜏 Yaw response time constant (0.5s)  
 𝐅wind Wind disturbance force  
 𝐰(𝑡) Wind velocity vector  
 𝐰𝑏 Base wind component  
 𝐰𝑔,𝑘 Wind gust components  
 𝑁𝑔 (𝑡) Poisson process for gust frequency (𝜆 = 0.1 Hz )  
 𝜼𝑡 Obstacle intent uncertainty noise  
 𝐉 Obstacle inertia tensor  
 𝜎𝑜 Obstacle intent uncertainty parameter (1.5 m/s2)  
 𝑉 (𝑘) Lyapunov function at iteration 𝑘  
 𝐹 ∗ Optimal path evaluation value  
 𝛥𝑉 (𝑘) Difference in Lyapunov function  
 𝛼, 𝛽 Convergence rate coefficients  
 𝜂 Optimization step size  
 𝐿 Lipschitz constant of ∇𝐹  
 𝜖max Upper bound of environmental uncertainty  
The proposed hybrid model operates through four synchronized 
phases:
(1) Real-time Perception: Raw sensor data undergoes adaptive noise 
filtering via AHF, where dynamic parameter updates (𝐾, 𝑁𝑒, 𝑓𝑛) are 
computed using iterative loss minimization.
(2) Situation Assessment : Filtered data feeds into the channel-
attention-enhanced CNN–LSTM for spatiotemporal feature extraction. 
The output constructs a Gaussian danger field whose parameters (𝜇, 𝜎) 
are estimated via maximum likelihood.
(3) Policy Generation: The DDPG agent receives the danger proba-
bility map and feasible domain constraints. Its actor network outputs 
continuous actions using prioritized experience replay, while the critic 
evaluates multi-objective rewards.
(4) Path Refinement : Raw trajectories from DDPG are optimized 
using SAPO’s breakpoint-curvature tradeoff and multi-path evaluation. 
This closed-loop process repeats at 10 Hz.
The structure of this model is illustrated in Fig.  7.
The execution pipeline is illustrated in Fig.  7 and detailed in Algo-
rithm 1.
As illustrated in Fig.  7, when the input is received, the data un-
dergoes initial preprocessing to perform denoising and smoothing op-
erations using the AHF algorithm. Subsequently, the processed data is 
input into the CNN and LSTM for the extraction of spatial and temporal 
features, with a channel attention mechanism employed to enhance the 
focus on significant features. Following the feature extraction and anal-
ysis, the situation assessment model constructs a probability density 
function based on the results and utilizes existing data for parameter es-
timation, leading to the probability distribution that indicates whether 
each point in the environment is safe and feasible. This probability 
distribution enables the determination of the feasible domain for its 
own state and actions, after which the DDPG algorithm can be applied 
to train the strategy model. Once the strategy model is developed, 
optimal decision-making can be swiftly achieved via the state. To 
Algorithm 1 SAPO-DDPG Hybrid Path Planning Framework
Require: Sensor stream 𝑆𝑡, Start position 𝑝𝑠, Goal position 𝑝𝑔, UAV swarm 
𝑈 = {𝑢1, 𝑢2, ..., 𝑢𝑁 }
Ensure: Optimized collision-free paths 𝑃 ∗ = {𝑃 ∗
1 , 𝑃 ∗
2 , ..., 𝑃 ∗
𝑁 } for all UAVs
1: Initialize: 
2: Actor network 𝜋(𝑠| 𝜃𝜋 ), Critic network 𝑄(𝑠, 𝑎| 𝜃𝑄), Target networks 𝜋′(𝑠| 𝜃𝜋′
), 
𝑄′(𝑠, 𝑎| 𝜃𝑄′
) with 𝜃𝜋′
← 𝜃𝜋 , 𝜃𝑄′
← 𝜃𝑄, Replay buffer 𝐵 with capacity 
𝐶, SAPO modules (AHF filter, CNN–LSTM-Attention network), Situation 
assessment parameters 𝛩SAPO
3: for episode = 1 to 𝑀 do 
4: Reset environment, receive initial state 𝑠0 for all UAVs 𝑢 ∈ 𝑈
5: for 𝑡 = 1 to 𝑇 do 
6: Phase 1: Real-time Perception 
7: for each UAV 𝑢 ∈ 𝑈 do 
8: ̃𝑆𝑢
𝑡 ← AHF(𝑆 𝑢
𝑡 ) {Apply Adaptive HANTs Filter}
9: end for
10: Phase 2: Situation Assessment 
11: 𝐹𝑡 ← CNN–LSTM-Attention({ ̃𝑆 𝑢
𝑡 | 𝑢 ∈ 𝑈 })
12: Estimate Gaussian parameters: ̂ 𝜇, ̂ 𝜎2 ← MLE(𝐹𝑡)
13: Construct danger probability map : 
14: for each grid cell (𝑖, 𝑗) in environment do 
15: 𝑑𝑖𝑗 ← min(Euclidean distance to all obstacle centroids)
16: 𝑖𝑗 ← 1√
2𝜋 ̂ 𝜎2
exp
(
−
(𝑑𝑖𝑗 − ̂ 𝜇)2
2 ̂ 𝜎2
)
 {Gaussian danger field}
17: end for
18: Phase 3: Policy Generation & Execution 
19: for each UAV 𝑢 ∈ 𝑈 do 
20: Observe current state 𝑠𝑢
𝑡 = [pose𝑢, , swarm_states]
21: Select action: 𝑎𝑢
𝑡 ← 𝜋(𝑠𝑢
𝑡 | 𝜃𝜋 ) + 𝑡 {Add exploration noise} 
22: Execute action 𝑎𝑢
𝑡 , observe reward 𝑟𝑢
𝑡 and next state 𝑠𝑢
𝑡+1
23: Store transition (𝑠𝑢
𝑡 , 𝑎𝑢
𝑡 , 𝑟𝑢
𝑡 , 𝑠𝑢
𝑡+1) in replay buffer 𝐵
24: end for
25: Phase 4: Path Refinement 
26: 𝑃raw ← Trajectory from executed actions {𝑎𝑢
𝑡 | 𝑢 ∈ 𝑈 }
27: 𝑃 ∗ ← SAPO-Optimize(𝑃raw) {Curvature-breakpoint optimization}
28: Model Learning (Prioritized Experience Replay) 
29: if | 𝐵| > batch_size then 
30: Sample mini-batch of 𝐾 transitions from 𝐵 with probability 𝑃 (𝑗) =
| 𝛿𝑗 |
∑
𝑘 | 𝛿𝑘|
31: for each sampled transition 𝑗 do 
32: Compute target value: 𝑦𝑗 = 𝑟𝑗 + 𝛾𝑄 ′(𝑠𝑗+1, 𝜋′(𝑠𝑗+1| 𝜃𝜋′
)| 𝜃𝑄′
)
33: Compute TD-error: 𝛿𝑗 = 𝑦𝑗 − 𝑄(𝑠𝑗 , 𝑎𝑗 | 𝜃𝑄)
34: Update priority: 𝑝𝑗 ← | 𝛿𝑗 | + 𝜖
35: end for
36: Update critic by minimizing: 𝐿 = 1
𝐾
∑
𝑗 (𝑦𝑗 − 𝑄(𝑠𝑗 , 𝑎𝑗 | 𝜃𝑄))2
37: Update actor using policy gradient: ∇𝜃𝜋 𝐽 ≈
1
𝐾
∑
𝑗 ∇𝑎𝑄(𝑠, 𝑎| 𝜃𝑄)| 𝑠=𝑠𝑗 ,𝑎=𝜋(𝑠𝑗 )∇𝜃𝜋 𝜋(𝑠| 𝜃𝜋 )| 𝑠𝑗
38: Update target networks: 𝜃𝑄′
← 𝜏𝜃 𝑄 + (1 −𝜏)𝜃𝑄′
𝜃𝜋′
← 𝜏𝜃 𝜋 + (1 −𝜏)𝜃𝜋′
39: end if
40: end for
41: end for
42: return 𝑃 ∗
comprehensively address the needs of various targets and mitigate the 
risk of reinforcement learning algorithms becoming trapped in local 
optima, the AHF algorithm is again employed to smooth the sequence 
of decision actions, followed by a path optimization method to finalize 
the optimization of details.
To establish the model, it is crucial to determine the appropriate 
weighting coefficients for the reward function in the DDPG model, as 
well as for the path quality evaluation function in the path optimization 
model, in relation to the specific objectives of the problem at hand. 
Meanwhile, the uncertainty modeling and management methods are 
presented at the end of this section.
4.1. Design of reward function
The reward function for the DDPG agent is designed to balance 
four critical objectives: safety 𝑅1, motion stability 𝑅2, traffic efficiency 
Engineering Applications of Artiϧcial Intelligence 165 (2026) 113518 
9 

===== PAGE 10 =====
H. Zhao et al.
Fig. 7. The SAPO-DDPG execution pipeline: (a) Input preprocessing via AHF, (b) Spatiotemporal encoding through attention-weighted CNN–LSTM, (c) DDPG 
decision-making within SAPO-derived action constraints, (d) Path smoothing via curvature optimization.
𝑅3, and swarm coordination 𝑅4.To achieve this, a distinct reward 
function is designed for each of these four goals. These sub-objective re-
ward functions are then weighted and combined to form an integrated 
approach.
The multi-objective reward function integrates four components, 
each addressing a critical navigation requirement:
Safety: Penalizes proximity to obstacles based on distance thresh-
olds.
Motion Stability: Rewards smooth acceleration and directional
alignment.
Traffic Efficiency: Encourages timely path completion.
Swarm Coordination: Prevents inter-agent collisions.
The safety reward (Eq. (30)) penalizes actions where the minimum 
distance min𝑖{𝐷𝑖} between any UAV and a danger area is less than 
the safety threshold 𝐷𝑠. The penalty is inversely proportional to the 
distance 𝐷𝑖, 𝑖 = 1 , 2, … , 𝑛, imposing a higher cost for closer proximity 
to obstacles. The safety distance 𝐷𝑠 (Eq.  (31)) is derived from the UAV’s 
kinematics and sensor accuracy. 
𝑅1 =
⎧
⎪
⎨
⎪⎩
− ∑𝑛
𝑖=1
𝐷𝑠
𝐷𝑖
if min𝑖{𝐷𝑖} ≤ 𝐷𝑠
0 if min𝑖{𝐷𝑖} > 𝐷 𝑠
(30)
where 𝑛 is the number of the UAVs in the swarm. 
𝐷𝑠 =
𝑣2
𝑚𝑎𝑥
2𝑎 + 𝐷𝑐 (31)
where 𝐷𝑐 is the collision threshold, which is determined by twice the 
on-board RTK-GPS positioning error.
Motion stability encompasses two primary aspects. First, the rate 
of change in speed should not be excessive, meaning that acceleration 
should be minimized as much as possible. Second, the trajectory of 
movement should be smooth to prevent sharp turns from adversely 
affecting the stable posture of the body of the UAV; this entails keeping 
the angle between speed and acceleration as small as possible. By 
integrating these two considerations, we can conclude that a smaller 
absolute value of acceleration leads to a higher reward value, while a 
smaller angle between acceleration and velocity also results in a greater 
reward value. Therefore, the reward function 𝑅2 for motion stability 
can be defined as outlined in Eq.  (32): 
𝑅2 = 3 − | 𝑎𝑡| + 1
cos 𝜃𝑣𝑎𝑡
(32)
where | 𝑎𝑡|  is the acceleration at the moment 𝑡; 𝜃𝑣𝑎𝑡 is the angle between 
speed and acceleration at the moment 𝑡.
Traffic efficiency primarily focuses on measuring the time it takes 
for an entire UAV swarm to traverse a specific area. Consequently, 
the reward function for traffic efficiency should be a dynamic, time-
dependent function. As time progresses, this function progressively 
increases the penalty value to encourage the model to reach its target 
as swiftly as possible. Therefore, the reward function 𝑅3 for traffic 
efficiency can be represented as outlined in Eq.  (33): 
𝑅3 =
⎧
⎪
⎨
⎪⎩
0 if 𝑇 ≤ 2𝐿
𝑣max
− 𝐷𝑒
20𝑣𝑚𝑎𝑥
if 𝑇 > 2𝐿
𝑣max
(33)
where 𝑇 is the time in the area; 𝐿 is the path length; 𝑣max is the 
maximum speed of the UAV; 𝐷𝑒 is distance from the exit. Considering 
that it is impossible for the UAV to keep a constant maximum speed 
and fly in a straight line, a 100% margin is given.
Finally, the purpose of the internal order of the UAV swarm is to 
avoid internal collisions, so the reward function 𝑅4 is shown as Eq. 
(34): 
𝑅4 =
⎧
⎪
⎨
⎪⎩
−9999 if UAVs  collide
0 if UAVs  do not collide
(34)
Engineering Applications of Artiϧcial Intelligence 165 (2026) 113518 
10 

===== PAGE 11 =====
H. Zhao et al.
These reward components address core navigation requirements: 
𝑅1 ensures safety through distance penalties, 𝑅2 promotes motion 
stability, 𝑅3 encourages timely completion, and 𝑅4 prevents inter-
agent collisions. Their weighted combination guides multi-objective 
optimization.
Rewards are computed at 100 Hz intervals:
- Safety reward 𝑅1 (Eq. (30)) uses Euclidean distance 𝐷𝑖 from UAV 
to nearest obstacle cluster centroid (updated via onboard LiDAR).
- Motion stability 𝑅2 (Eq. (32)) derives 𝜃𝑣𝑎𝑡 from IMU-based pose 
estimation.
- Traffic efficiency 𝑅3 (Eq. (33)) starts timing (𝑇 ) when the lead 
UAV enters a sector.
- Collision checks 𝑅4 (Eq. (34)) use axis-aligned bounding boxes 
with ±𝐷𝑐 tolerance.
Upon establishing the reward function for the subitem, it is essential 
to ascertain the appropriate weight for each reward function. In the 
forthcoming experiment, various weights will be assigned to identify 
the optimal weighting configuration.
4.2. Determination of weighting coefficient
In the path optimization model, we define a path quality evalua-
tion function, as presented in Eqs.  (16) and (18), to differentiate the 
optimization levels of various paths. However, the weights in these 
functions must be tailored to meet the specific requirements of the 
problem at hand. In the context of UAV swarm path planning within a 
dynamic multi-obstacle environment, when confronted with the multi-
path issue, our focus primarily lies on the safety and traffic efficiency 
of the paths, while we place less emphasis on traffic flow limits and the 
number of turns. Consequently, we can assign zero values to weights 
𝜔2 and 𝜔5. Additionally, given that safety takes precedence over traffic 
efficiency, and that the variance in path length serves as a better 
indicator of traffic efficiency than speed, we set the weights as follows: 
𝜔1 = 0.3, 𝜔2 = 0, 𝜔3 = 0.5, 𝜔4 = 0.1, 𝜔5 = 0. The resulting path quality 
function is illustrated in Eq.  (35): 
𝐹 = 0.3𝑒−𝑙 − 0.5𝜌 − 0.1𝐷(𝑣) (35)
The theoretical basis for weight selection is given below:
The weight parameters 𝜔𝑗 in Eq.  (16) embody Pareto-optimal trade-
offs among conflicting objectives:
• Safety priority: 𝜔3 > 𝜔 1 (path risk 𝜌 dominates path length 𝑙)
• Swarm coordination: 𝜔5 penalizes bottleneck formation (𝑚′∕𝑛𝑢)
This aligns with UAV kinematic constraints and swarm dynamics. 
The specific values in Eq.  (35) derive from experimental Pareto-front 
analysis.
In the context of a multi-bend scenario, centripetal acceleration 
serves as an indicator of both the smoothness of the path and the quality 
of traffic flow. The initial and final angles, representing the starting 
and ending points of the reaction path, are not only disregarded in the 
calculation of the extreme value but also have minimal impact on the 
overall optimization of the path. Accordingly, the following parameters 
have been established: 𝜔1 = 𝜔3 = 0.01 and 𝜔2 = 0.98. The final function 
is represented in Eq.  (36): 
⎧
⎪
⎨
⎪⎩
𝑍 = 𝐹𝑙(𝜌)(𝑙𝑒−𝑙 − 0.01𝑣0 sin 𝜃𝑧 − 0.98
𝑣2
𝑚
𝑟 − 0.01 sin 𝜑)
𝐹𝑙(𝜌) < 1
(36)
After simplification, the above objective function can be more easily 
differentiated and extreme points can be found, thereby obtaining an 
optimized scheme.
Table 7
Sensor uncertainty parameters and compensation strategies.
 Sensor Latency (ms) Noise (𝜎) Compensation method  
 LiDAR 50 0.25 m AHF temporal smoothing 
 IMU 20 0.1 m/s2 Kalman filtering  
 GPS 100 0.5 m Dead reckoning fusion  
4.3. Uncertainty modeling and management
The SAPO-DDPG framework explicitly addresses four sources of 
uncertainty.
4.3.1. Dubins vehicle dynamics with noise
The UAV kinematics follow modified Dubins model with Gaussian 
noise as shown in Section 4.3.1. 
⎧
⎪
⎨
⎪⎩
̇ 𝑥= 𝑣 cos 𝜃 + 𝑤𝑥
̇ 𝑦= 𝑣 sin 𝜃 + 𝑤𝑦
̇𝜃 = 𝑢
𝜏 + 𝑤𝜃
where 𝐰 = [𝑤𝑥, 𝑤𝑦, 𝑤𝜃]𝑇 ∼  (0, 𝛴𝑑 ) (37)
Here 𝜏 = 0 .5s represents the yaw response time constant, and 𝛴𝑑 =
diag(0.12, 0.12, 0.052) captures translational (𝑥, 𝑦) and rotational (𝜃) dis-
turbance covariance. This modified Dubins model incorporates Gaus-
sian noise to account for real-world UAV dynamics uncertainties. The 
covariance matrix 𝛴𝑑 captures different noise characteristics in trans-
lational and rotational dimensions. This models real-world control 
surface imperfections and atmospheric micro-turbulence.
4.3.2. Wind gust disturbances
Wind effects combine steady flow and stochastic gusts as shown 
in Eq.  (38). 
𝐅wind = 1
2 𝜌𝐶𝑑 𝐴‖𝐯uav − 𝐰(𝑡)‖(𝐰(𝑡) − 𝐯uav) (38)
where 𝐰(𝑡) = 𝐰𝑏 +∑𝑁𝑔 (𝑡)
𝑘=1 𝐰𝑔,𝑘 ⋅I[𝑡𝑘,𝑡𝑘+𝛥𝑡𝑘]. The base wind 𝐰𝑏 ∼  (0, 5) m∕s
is uniformly distributed, while gusts follow Poisson process 𝑁𝑔(𝑡) ∼
Poisson(𝜆 = 0.1Hz) with exponential magnitude ‖𝐰𝑔,𝑘‖ ∼ Exp(0.2).
4.3.3. Sensor imperfections
Table  7 quantifies the key sensor limitations:
4.3.4. Obstacle motion uncertainty
Dynamic obstacles follow stochastic dynamics as shown in Eq.  (39). 
𝐯obs(𝑡 + 𝛥𝑡) = 𝐯obs(𝑡) + 𝜼𝑡
⏟ ⏟ ⏟
intent noise
+ 𝐉𝐰𝑡
⏟ ⏟ ⏟
wind effect
(39)
where 𝜼𝑡 ∼  (0, 𝜎2
𝑜 𝐈) models intent uncertainty (𝜎𝑜 = 1 .5 𝑚∕𝑠2), and 
𝐉 is the obstacle’s inertia tensor. The CNN–LSTM predictor learns to 
estimate E[𝜼𝑡] from historical observations.
4.4. Convergence proofs
To establish the theoretical robustness of SAPO-DDPG, we provide 
convergence analysis for both the SAPO optimization and the DDPG 
training process.
Convergence of SAPO Path Optimization.
Under Lipschitz-continuous environmental dynamics (Khalil, 2002), 
the SAPO path evaluation function 𝐹 (Eq. (15)) converges to a local 
optimum. Consider the Lyapunov function: (Eq. (40)) 
𝑉 (𝑘) = 𝐹 (𝑘) − 𝐹 ∗ (40)
where 𝐹 ∗ is the optimal value. The difference 𝛥𝑉 (𝑘) = 𝑉 (𝑘+1) − 𝑉 (𝑘)
satisfies (Eq. (41)): 
𝛥𝑉 (𝑘) ≤ −𝛼 ‖‖‖∇𝐹 (𝑘)‖‖‖
2
+ 𝛽𝜖max (41)
Engineering Applications of Artiϧcial Intelligence 165 (2026) 113518 
11 

===== PAGE 12 =====
H. Zhao et al.
Table 8
Table of notations in Section 5 with values.
 Parameter Description Subsection Value  
 𝐾 Error threshold for filtering 5.2, 5.4–5.5 = 10  
 𝑁𝑒 Maximum deletion points 5.2, 5.4–5.5 = 20  
 𝑓𝑛 Low-frequency component count 5.2, 5.4–5.5 = 9  
 𝐷𝑠 Safety distance threshold 5.1,5.3–5.5 ≈ 10 m  
 𝐷𝑐 Collision threshold 5.1,5.3–5.5 = 0.5 m  
 𝑣max Maximum UAV flight speed 5.1,5.3–5.5 = 15 m∕s  
 𝑎 Acceleration range 5.1,5.3–5.5 ∈ [−12, 12] 𝑚∕𝑠2  
 𝑇𝑠 Sampling rate 5.1,5.3–5.5 = 0.1 s−1  
 𝑁 Number of UAVs in swarm 5.1,5.3–5.5 = 5  
 𝐿𝑠𝑙 Straight-line distance 5.1,5.3–5.5 =
√
34 × 102 m  
 𝛼 Learning rate of DDPG 5.1,5.3–5.5 = 0.99  
 𝛾 Discount factor of DDPG 5.1,5.3–5.5 = 0.8  
 𝜏 Yaw response time constant 5.5.3 = 1.0 s  
 𝜆 Wind gust Poisson frequency 5.5.3 = 0.1 Hz  
 𝜎𝑜 Obstacle intent uncertainty 5.5.3 = 3.0 𝑚∕𝑠2  
 Network width The size of the convolutional neural network 5.4–5.5 5-3-3-1(4-layers) 
 Seed Random seed 5.1,5.3–5.5 42-51(10 trials)  
where: 𝛼 = 𝜂(2 − 𝜂𝐿) > 0 is the convergence rate coefficient, with 𝜂 as 
the optimization step size and 𝐿 as the Lipschitz constant of ∇𝐹 . 𝛽 > 0
is the uncertainty scaling facto, bounded by the maximum curvature of 
𝐹 . 𝜖max is the upper bound of environmental uncertainty (wind, sensor 
noise, etc.). For 𝜖max < 𝛼 ‖∇𝐹 ‖2∕𝛽, 𝛥𝑉 (𝑘) < 0 guarantees monotonic 
convergence.
Variance Reduction in DDPG.
Prioritized experience replay (Eq. (28)) reduces policy gradient vari-
ance by (1∕
√
𝑁) (Schaul et al., 2016) versus uniform sampling. The 
TD-error prioritization minimizes Kullback–Leibler divergence between 
optimal and sampled distributions, tightening the bound in policy 
gradient updates as Eq.  (42): 
Var(∇𝜃𝑢 𝐽 )Prioritized ≤ Var(∇𝜃𝑢 𝐽 )Uniform
√
𝑁
(42)
These convergence proofs establish theoretical foundations: Eqs. 
(40)–(41) guarantee SAPO optimization convergence under environ-
mental uncertainty, while Equation (42) demonstrates prioritized re-
play’s variance reduction for stable DDPG training.
5. Experiment and analysis
To assess the effectiveness of the algorithm, this paper undertakes a 
series of experiments as follows: Experiment 1 involves varying weight 
coefficients to identify the optimal combination for the reward func-
tion. In Experiment 2, the AHF model is compared to the original model 
to determine whether improvements in filtering and smoothing effects 
are evident. Experiment 3 evaluates the enhanced DDPG model against 
the original model to examine potential gains in training efficiency and 
decision-making performance. Experiment 4 contrasts the mixed path 
planning model with the current advanced path planning model to ana-
lyze the performance of each test model across different environments. 
Lastly, Experiment 5 conducted supplementary experiments, including 
ablation experiments, scalability verification, and extreme condition 
testing, to comprehensively examine the overall performance of the 
model. The experimental summary will be provided at the end of the 
experimental section.
All the important experimental parameters presented in Section 5, 
along with their application scopes and values, are shown in Table  8.
5.1. Reward function weight value selection
The experiment was conducted with the following parameters: max-
imum flight speed 𝑣max = 15 m∕s , acceleration range 𝑎 ∈ [−12, 12] 𝑚∕𝑠2, 
collision threshold 𝐷𝑐 = 0 .5 m, safety distance 𝐷𝑠 ≈ 10 m, swarm size 
𝑁 = 5, sampling rate 𝑇𝑠 = 0.1 s−1, straight-line distance 𝐿𝑠𝑙 =
√
34×10 2
m, DDPG learning rate 𝛼 = 0.99, and discount factor 𝛾 = 0.8.
The training and test scenes (Figs.  8 and 9) consisted of rectangular 
areas (500 m × 300 m). All models were trained in the training scene 
and evaluated in the test scene. To ensure comparability, we employed 
an early termination criterion: if the total path length exceeded 8000 m, 
the planning was terminated. We conducted 10 Monte Carlo runs per 
weight configuration and evaluated four key metrics: path length 𝐿, 
completion time 𝑇 , average absolute acceleration | ̄ 𝑎| , and minimum 
obstacle distance 𝑑min.
The experimental results are shown in Table  9.
Table  9 presents the experimental results. The weight ratio 𝜔1 ∶ 𝜔2 ∶
𝜔3 ∶ 𝜔4 = 1 ∶ 15 ∶ 20 ∶ 1  achieved the best performance, yielding the 
shortest path length (1619.5 ± 6 .8 m) and near-optimal other metrics. 
The final reward function is defined as Eq.  (43): 
𝑅 = 𝑅1 + 15𝑅2 + 20𝑅3 + 𝑅4 (43)
Note that this weight combination is specific to our experimental 
scenarios and should be recalibrated for different environments or task 
requirements.
5.2. Comparative experiment of filtering algorithms
This experiment evaluates the filtering performance of our pro-
posed AHF method against the standard HANTs approach. We used 
acceleration time-series data collected during a 5-minute UAV flight.
The AHF model was initialized with 𝐾0 = 10, 𝑁𝑒0 = 20, and 𝑓0 = 9, 
while the HANTs parameters were set to 𝐾 = 2, 𝑁𝑒 = 10, and 𝑓 = 3. We 
compared the number of iterations (𝑁𝐼 ), time mean square deviation 
(𝑇 𝑀𝑆𝐷 ), and smoothing rate (𝑆𝑅), calculated as Eq.  (44)–(45): 
𝑇 𝑀𝑆𝐷 =
∑𝑁
𝑘=1(𝑥𝑜𝑘 − 𝑥𝑖𝑘)2
𝑁 (44)
𝑆𝑅 = 𝐴𝑖 − 𝐴𝑜
𝐴𝑖
(45)
where 𝑥𝑖𝑘 is the 𝑘th data before filtering, 𝑥𝑜𝑘 is the 𝑘th data after 
filtering, 𝐴𝑖 is the amplitude of the data before filtering, and 𝐴𝑜 is the 
amplitude of the data after filtering.
Figs.  10–12 illustrates the distribution of the three groups of original 
data alongside the waveforms that have been filtered using the two 
methodologies. Additionally, Table  10 presents a comparative analysis 
of the performance of the two methods across these three distinct 
datasets.
According to the data presented in Figs.  10–12, we can see that 
the AHF model demonstrates superior performance in filtering and 
smoothing effects among the three groups of experimental data. It 
is clear that the AHF model more accurately reflects the distribution 
characteristics and trends of the data when compared to the HANTs 
model.
Engineering Applications of Artiϧcial Intelligence 165 (2026) 113518 
12 

===== PAGE 13 =====
H. Zhao et al.
Fig. 8. The setting of the training scene.
Fig. 9. The setting of the test scene.
Table 9
The path planning performance with different weight values (mean ± std).
 𝜔1 ∶ 𝜔2 ∶ 𝜔3 ∶ 𝜔4 𝐿(𝑚) 𝑇 (𝑠) | ̄ 𝑎| (𝑚∕𝑠2) 𝑑min(𝑚)  
 1:1:1:1 > 8000 – – –  
 1:5:5:1 > 8000 – – –  
 1:10:10:1 5816.1 ± 23.6 721.8 ± 12.9 1.08 ± 0.11 10.04 ± 0.07 
 1:15:15:1 1829.7 ± 9.7 296.8 ± 7.8 0.85 ± 0.05 10.15 ± 0.05 
 1:20:20:1 > 8000 – – –  
 1:20:15:1 > 8000 – – –  
 1:15:20:1 1619.5 ± 6.8 282.4 ± 5.9 0.88 ± 0.06 10.13 ± 0.03 
 1:15:25:1 > 8000 – – –  
 1:15:19:1 1650.9 ± 7.2 281.9 ± 5.7 0.88 ± 0.06 10.12 ± 0.03 
 1:15:21:1 1688.7 ± 7.1 307.7 ± 6.1 0.92 ± 0.06 10.13 ± 0.03 
Engineering Applications of Artiϧcial Intelligence 165 (2026) 113518 
13 

===== PAGE 14 =====
H. Zhao et al.
Fig. 10. The first set of original data and its filtered waveform.
Fig. 11. The second set of original data and its filtered waveform.
Fig. 12. The third set of original data and its filtered waveform.
As indicated in Table  10, in the first data set, the smoothing rate 𝑆𝑅
of both models is nearly identical. However, the AHF model exhibits a 
significant advantage in terms of time mean square deviation 𝑇 𝑀𝑆𝐷 . 
In the subsequent two sets of data, the AHF model continues to show 
stronger performance in both 𝑆𝑅 and 𝑇 𝑀𝑆𝐷 metrics. This enhanced 
performance can be attributed to the AHF model’s ability to  adjust 
Table 10
The performance comparison and analysis of two methods on three sets of data.
 Group 
number
𝑁 AHF model HANTs model
 𝑁𝐼 𝑇 𝑀𝑆𝐷 𝑆𝑅 𝑁𝐼 𝑇 𝑀𝑆𝐷 𝑆𝑅  
 1 62 56 0.322 27.1% 42 0.506 27.5% 
 2 65 64 0.062 37.0% 53 0.129 32.7% 
 3 59 49 0.037 40.8% 43 0.041 35.8% 
the number of frequencies fitted to the waveform, selecting the subset 
of results with the least loss from the original data for output. This 
approach mitigates the impact of artificially set parameters on model 
performance. Nevertheless, due to the requirement of selecting the 
optimal results from the best options, the AHF model does not excel 
in the number of iterations 𝑁𝐼 . In comparison to the HANTs model, 
the AHF model necessitates a greater number of iterations to achieve 
convergence.
The purpose of this experiment is to verify whether the addition 
of an adaptive mechanism has a positive effect on the filtering per-
formance. It can be seen from the experimental results that through 
improvement, the performance of the AHF model has indeed surpassed 
that of the HANTs model. However, this does not mean that the AHF 
model can completely replace the HANTs model. Compared with the 
AHF model, the HANTs model has a simpler structure. Moreover, for 
experienced users, the HANTs model theoretically has performance 
close to that of the AHF model under excellent initial parameters. For 
the dynamic and complex scenarios targeted by this research, due to 
the complexity and uncertainty of the original data, it is difficult to 
determine effective initial parameters through experience. Therefore, 
the AHF model is more suitable to be used as the filtering model.
5.3. Comparative experiment of DDPG model training
To evaluate the effectiveness of our enhanced DDPG algorithm, 
we conducted comparative experiments by training both the original 
algorithm model and our proposed improved model. The experimental 
setup is illustrated in Fig.  8, with the relevant parameter settings 
consistent with those used in the previous reward function weight 
value selection experiment. We employed the same reward function as 
described in Eq.  (43). A total of 300 training episodes were carried out, 
each lasting 3 min. Throughout the experiment, we recorded the cumu-
lative reward value for each training episode. By analyzing the trend of 
the cumulative reward values, we can compare the convergence rates 
of the two models.
As illustrated in Fig.  13, the original model reaches the optimal path 
after approximately 130 episodes, with the cumulative reward stabi-
lizing around 250 episodes. In contrast, the improved model achieves 
the optimal path in about 100 episodes, with cumulative rewards 
converging around 210 episodes. This demonstrates that enhancements 
to the experience reply mechanism significantly accelerate the conver-
gence speed of the DDPG model, allowing it to identify the optimal 
decision-making strategy more quickly and efficiently.
The significance of this experiment lies in comparing the differences 
in training efficiency between the DDPG models before and after im-
provement. It can be seen that the improved DDPG model, compared 
with the original model, has 23% fewer episodes approaching the 
reward peak and 16% fewer episodes completing convergence. This 
indicates that the improved DDPG model has indeed enhanced the 
training efficiency and has a beneficial effect on the overall training 
speed of the model to a certain extent.
5.4. Comparative experiment of several path planning models
To evaluate the effectiveness of the algorithm, we compared the 
trained SAPO-DDPG model with several established models, includ-
ing APF-RRT* (Xu et al., 2023a), GA-RRT (Fan et al., 2024), B-
APFDQN (Kong et al., 2023), and TSEB-DDPG (Tian et al., 2024). The 
testing scene is illustrated in Fig.  9.
Engineering Applications of Artiϧcial Intelligence 165 (2026) 113518 
14 

===== PAGE 15 =====
H. Zhao et al.
Fig. 13. The trend of total reward value during training.
Table 11
The experimental results of single UAV path planning (mean ± std).
 Algorithm 𝑇𝑡 𝐿𝑝(𝑚) 𝑇𝑐 (𝑠) 𝑛𝑐  
 APF-RRT* 278.4 ± 9.7 s 2461.2 ± 37.2 278.4 ± 9.7 3.3 ± 1.49 
 GA-RRT 203.2 ± 14.2 s 2170.4 ± 21.4 203.2 ± 14.2 1.2 ± 0.78 
 B-APFDQN 15.8 ± 0.2 h 2001.4 ± 18.7 137.8 ± 11.1 0.7 ± 0.82 
 TSEB-DDPG 23.8 ± 0.2 h 1860.3 ± 15.5 121 ± 8.7 0  
 SAPO-DDPG 29.4 ± 0.2 h 1821.4 ± 13.4 103 ± 8.9 0  
In this experiment, a 4-layer convolutional network with a 5-3-3-
1 structure is used. The convolutional kernels used in the first layer 
are 5 × 5 convolutional kernels, which are used for extracting features 
over a wide range. This not only effectively reduces parameters but 
also does not generate a large amount of computation. The subsequent 
two layers adopt 3 × 3 convolutional kernels, which can control the 
number of parameters and reduce the complexity of the operation at 
the same time. The last layer adopts a 1 × 1 convolutional kernel, which 
is equivalent to a fully connected layer.
Our experiments encompassed two main components: the path plan-
ning for a single UAV and the path planning for a UAV swarm. For the 
single UAV path planning, we focused on several key metrics, including 
training time 𝑇𝑡, path length 𝐿𝑝, completion time 𝑇𝑐, collision frequency 
𝑛𝑐, and the shape of the path generated by different algorithms. In the 
UAV swarm path planning test, we primarily assessed the total path 
length of the swarm 𝐿𝑡, the maximum time difference in completion 
𝑇𝑑 , and the number of collisions 𝑁𝑐 encountered.
Figs.  14–15 shows the planned paths of the five models in a cer-
tain run of experiments. Table  11 shows the data comparison of the 
corresponding indicators of these models.
The APF-RRT* and GA-RRT models do not incorporate a neural 
network structure, which means they do not require pre-training; their 
training time aligns with their overall completion time. As illustrated 
in Table  11, the iteration time for the SAPO-DDPG algorithm is longer 
than that of the other algorithms, primarily due to SAPO-DDPG’s more 
complex architecture. While the convergence speed of the DDPG model 
is enhanced, the training time paradoxically increases because of the 
secondary optimization introduced by the SAPO algorithm. In terms of 
path length, completion time, and collision frequency, the SAPO-DDPG 
algorithm exhibits distinct advantages. This can be attributed to its ap-
proach of multiple optimization policies, which not only preserves the 
efficient decision-making capabilities of reinforcement learning but also 
enhances path optimization through the secondary adjustment of SAPO. 
It can be seen that the optimization quality of the path in the SAPO-
DDPG algorithm surpasses that of other algorithms. Furthermore, it is 
worth noting that, from the perspective of planning trajectories, unlike 
Table 12
The experimental results of UAV swarm path planning (mean ± std).
 Algorithm 𝐿𝑡(𝑚) 𝑇𝑑 (𝑠) 𝑁𝑐  
 APF-RRT* 14932.5 ± 1429.6 26.4 ± 3.28 16.3 ± 5.44 
 GA-RRT 12315.3 ± 1017.3 21.3 ± 5.31 5.9 ± 4.31  
 B-APFDQN 10897.4 ± 831.72 23.2 ± 4.72 3.3 ± 4.40  
 TSEB-DDPG 10115.8 ± 759.38 21.1 ± 4.53 0.4 ± 0.89  
 SAPO-DDPG 9691.6 ± 314.65 16.2 ± 3.65 0.2 ± 0.67  
other reinforcement learning models, the SAPO-DDPG model notices 
the differences between the test scenarios and the training scenarios 
and selects a more optimized route, which indicates that it has certain 
advantages in detail processing. Therefore, the SAPO-DDPG model 
demonstrates stronger competitiveness compared to similar algorithms 
in the context of single UAV path planning.
In our UAV swarm path planning experiment, we utilize a swarm of 
five UAVs to simulate collective behavior. Each UAV in the swarm is 
treated as a dynamic obstacle to the others, allowing for greater adapt-
ability. To enhance the flexibility of the cluster, we intentionally do not 
incorporate any specific formation for the swarm in this experiment. 
The performance of each model used in the experiment is detailed in 
Table  12.
Due to the significant overlap in paths among multiple UAVs, 
traditional path superposition fails to adequately represent the relative 
positional relationships between UAVs at different time nodes. Con-
sequently, this study shifts focus from comparing path morphology 
to three key metrics: total path length, maximum completion time 
difference, and number of collisions. As shown in Table  12, the SAPO-
DDPG model demonstrates distinct advantages in these three metrics 
compared to other models in swarm path planning. This superiority 
arises not only from the method’s consideration of the UAV swarm’s 
focus during path planning but also from the SAPO approach’s treat-
ment of each UAV as an individual entity rather than as part of a 
whole. This individual-centric dynamic optimization allows for the 
formulation of a globally optimal solution. As a result, the SAPO-DDPG 
model significantly enhances individual flexibility and alleviates certain 
path traffic constraints, leading to its superior performance in UAV 
swarm path planning compared to similar algorithms.
To verify whether the improvement of the algorithm compared with 
the existing algorithms is significant, we conducted significance tests 
on the experimental results of the two models, SAPO-DDPG and TSEB-
DDPG. The inspection objectives are the four indicators 𝐿𝑝, 𝑇𝑐 , 𝐿𝑡 and 
𝑇𝑑 , and the adopted method is Welch t-tests.
Among them, the statistics to be obtained include: 𝑡-value, degrees 
of freedom 𝑑𝑓 , 𝑝-value and effect size Cohen’s d 𝑑. The 𝑝-value can be 
obtained by looking up the table, and the calculation methods of the 
other three statistics are shown in Eqs. (46)–(48). 
𝑡 =
̄𝑋1 − ̄𝑋2√
𝑠2
1
𝑛1
+
𝑠2
2
𝑛2
(46)
𝑑𝑓 =
(
𝑠2
1
𝑛1
+
𝑠2
2
𝑛2
)2
(𝑠2
1∕𝑛1
)2
𝑛1 − 1 +
(𝑠2
2∕𝑛2
)2
𝑛2 − 1
(47)
𝑑 =
̄𝑋1 − ̄𝑋2√
(𝑛1 − 1)𝑠2
1 + (𝑛2 − 1)𝑠2
2
𝑛1 + 𝑛2 − 2
(48)
where ̄𝑋𝑖, 𝑖 = 1 , 2 is the sample means of group 𝑖; 𝑠2
𝑖 , 𝑖 = 1 , 2 is the 
unbiased sample variances of group 𝑖; 𝑛𝑖, 𝑖 = 1 , 2 is the sample sizes 
of group 𝑖. For the effect size 𝑑, 0.2 < | 𝑑| < 0.5 means small effect, 
0.5 < | 𝑑| < 0.8 means medium effect and | 𝑑| ≥ 0.8 means large 
Engineering Applications of Artiϧcial Intelligence 165 (2026) 113518 
15 

===== PAGE 16 =====
H. Zhao et al.
 
(a) APF-RRT*
  
(b) GA-RRT
 
 
(c) B-APFDQN
  
(d) TSEB-DDPG
 
 
(e) SAPO-DDPG
 
Fig. 14. The path planning results for five models.
Fig. 15. The path results are overlaid on the test scene.
effect. These equations define our statistical validation framework: 
Eqs. (46) computes the t-statistic, Eqs. (47) adjusts degrees of freedom, 
and Eqs. (48) determines effect size. This provides both statistical 
significance and practical importance assessment.
The test results are shown in Table  13.
the results of the Welch’s t-test presented in Table  13 provide robust 
statistical evidence for evaluating the performance improvements of 
SAPO-DDPG over the TSEB-DDPG baseline. In the single-UAV scenario, 
Engineering Applications of Artiϧcial Intelligence 165 (2026) 113518 
16 

===== PAGE 17 =====
H. Zhao et al.
Table 13
Significance test of the experimental data of SAPO-DDPG and TSEB-DDPG.
 Statistical magnitude 𝐿𝑝 𝑇𝑐 𝐿𝑡 𝑇𝑑  
 𝑡 −6.01 −4.574 −1.632 −2.665 
 𝑑𝑓 17 18 12 17  
 𝑝 < 0.001 < 0.001 0.128 < 0.05 
 𝑑 −2.68 −2.05 −0.73 −1.19  
the extremely small p-values (𝑝 < 0.001) for both path length (𝐿𝑝) and 
completion time (𝑇𝑐 ) allow us to confidently reject the null hypothesis, 
confirming that the observed performance superiority is statistically 
significant and not attributable to random chance. More critically, the 
large effect sizes (Cohen’s 𝑑 > 2.0) for both metrics demonstrate that the 
magnitude of improvement possesses substantial practical significance 
in real-world applications, far exceeding the conventional threshold for 
a ‘large’ effect (𝑑 > 0.8).
For swarm navigation, the statistical analysis reveals more nuanced 
but equally meaningful insights. The non-significant result for total 
path length (𝐿𝑡, 𝑝 = 0 .128) is accompanied by a medium effect size 
(𝑑 = 0 .73). This pattern suggests that while the reduction in total 
distance traveled across the swarm exhibits variability that prevents 
reaching conventional statistical significance thresholds across all ex-
perimental runs, there exists a consistent and meaningful trend toward 
more efficient global routing. The medium effect size indicates that this 
improvement is nevertheless practically relevant.
Conversely, the statistically significant reduction in maximum time 
difference (𝑇𝑑 , 𝑝 < 0.05) with a large effect size (𝑑 = 1 .19) pro-
vides definitive evidence that SAPO-DDPG achieves superior swarm 
coordination and synchronization. This metric is particularly critical 
for mission success in applications where the simultaneous arrival or 
coordinated operation of all UAVs is operationally essential, such as 
in coordinated surveillance, formation flying, or simultaneous payload 
delivery scenarios.
The statistical evidence collectively indicates that SAPO-DDPG not 
only produces statistically significant improvements in individual UAV 
performance metrics but also delivers practically meaningful enhance-
ments in swarm coordination under dynamic multi-obstacle environ-
ments. The combination of statistical testing with effect size analysis 
provides a comprehensive validation of our method’s effectiveness 
across both individual and collective performance dimensions.
The experiment of this subsection is to verify whether the proposed 
SAPO-DDPG model has a positive performance improvement compared 
with other existing advanced hybrid models. The test scenarios used 
in the experiment were obtained by making minor modifications to 
the training scenarios. The experimental results show that the SAPO-
DDPG model has achieved a significant improvement in performance 
compared with other existing models, which reflects the innovation of 
this study.
5.5. Supplementary experiment
5.5.1. Ablation study
To rigorously evaluate the necessity of our key design choices, 
we conducted a controlled ablation experiment comparing four model 
variants in a dynamic multi-obstacle environment (500 m × 300 m 
with 10 moving obstacles). All tests used single UAV with randomized 
start-goal pairs, averaged over 10 Monte Carlo trials.
Four model configurations were tested:
• Full model: Our complete model (AHF + SAPO + DDPG).
• No AHF: Replaced AHF with adaptive Kalman filters (AKF).
• No AM: Removed attention mechanism(AM), retaining only CNN–
LSTM.
• No SAPO: Removed SAPO’s situation assessment, retaining only 
DDPG.
Table 14
Ablation study results (mean ± std).
 Model Path Length (m) Collisions Training time (h) Time (s)  
 Full model 1821.4 ± 13.4 0 29.4 ± 0.2 103 ± 8.9  
 No AHF 1975.8 ± 17.6 3 ± 1 29.2 ± 0.2 121 ± 9.4  
 No AM 2017.4 ± 19.1 3 ± 1 28.3 ± 0.2 127 ± 9.1  
 No SAPO 2155.4 ± 22.3 5 ± 2 21.7 ± 0.1 152 ± 10.2 
Table 15
Performance metrics for different swarm sizes.
 Size Time (s) Communication overhead (KB/s) 
 1 103 ± 8.9 –  
 5 172 ± 16.3 15.6 ± 2.1  
 10 246 ± 25.7 32.4 ± 3.5  
 25 278 ± 35.4 79.9 ± 5.7  
 50 331 ± 47.9 172.3 ± 12.6  
We evaluated four key metrics:
1. Path length (m): Total trajectory distance per UAV.
2. Collisions: Sum of UAV-obstacle impacts.
3. Training time (h): Mean The time consumed by the model 
during training.
4. Time (s): Duration from start to last UAV’s arrival.
As shown in Table  14, removing AHF, AM, SAPO degraded perfor-
mance significantly.
• AHF’s Role: AKF (No AHF) increased collisions by 300% and re-
duced safety margins by 21%, confirming that dynamic parameter 
adaptation is critical for handling unpredictable noise.
• AM’s Role: In the absence of an attention mechanism, due to the 
lack of attention to important features, the path was extended 
by 10.76%, and the collision rate also increased significantly, 
proving the necessity of the attention mechanism for the model.
• SAPO’s Role: Without SAPO, paths lengthened by 18.33% due 
to poor global awareness, while collisions rose sharply (5 vs. 0), 
proving its necessity for spatiotemporal reasoning.
This experiment verified the necessity of each key module in SAPO-
DDPG and confirmed that each sub-model used was beneficial and 
indispensable.
5.5.2. Scalability verification
To evaluate the computational scalability and communication over-
head of SAPO-DDPG, we conducted additional experiments with UAV 
swarm sizes ranging from 1 to 50 agents. In this experiment, we 
examined the completion time (from the start to the last UAV leaving 
the exit) and the communication overhead. The results are summarized 
in Table  15.
The results show that SAPO-DDPG can maintain a high planning 
efficiency even in a large group. For the same scenario, after the cluster 
size was expanded tenfold, the total completion time only increased by 
about 92% (less than 100%). Meanwhile, as each UAV needs to share 
basic state information with its surrounding neighbors, the communi-
cation overhead approximately increases linearly. The above indicates 
that in larger-scale UAV swarms, this model still has good planning 
performance.
This experiment verified the performance changes of the model 
under a larger cluster scale. The results show that as the scale expands, 
both the task completion time and the communication load show an 
upward trend, but they are both within an acceptable range. Therefore, 
this model has the scalability to meet the requirements of different 
cluster scales.
Engineering Applications of Artiϧcial Intelligence 165 (2026) 113518 
17 

===== PAGE 18 =====
H. Zhao et al.
Table 16
Comparative performance under extreme conditions.
 500 m × 300 m Environment 1000 m × 600 m Environment
 Metric Scenario 1 Scenario 2 Scenario 3 Scenario 1 Scenario 2 Scenario 3 
 SAPO-DDPG
 Path increase (%) 12.3 ± 2.1 8.7 ± 1.8 15.7 ± 2.9 14.2 ± 2.4 11.3 ± 2.1 18.5 ± 3.2  
 Success rate (%) 100 95 90 94 88 85  
 TSEB-DDPG
 Path increase (%) 18.7 ± 3.5 14.2 ± 2.9 24.6 ± 4.1 23.5 ± 4.2 19.8 ± 3.7 31.2 ± 5.3  
 Success rate (%) 78 68 58 72 63 51  
5.5.3. Extreme condition testing
To rigorously evaluate the robustness of SAPO-DDPG under diverse 
adverse conditions, we conducted comprehensive testing across two 
distinct environmental scales: (1) the standard 500 m × 300 m  scene 
from Section 5.1, and (2) an expanded 1000 m × 600 m  scene with 
higher obstacle density. Three progressively challenging scenarios were 
executed at each scale, with TSEB-DDPG (Tian et al., 2024) serving as 
the primary baseline for comparative analysis. Scenario 1 simulated 
high wind gusts modeled through Dryden turbulence spectra (𝐿𝑤 =
50 m , 𝜎𝑤 = 3m∕s). Scenario 2 introduced sensor degradation including 
LiDAR range reduction (50 m), GPS packet loss (20%), and IMU drift 
(0.1m∕s2/min). Scenario 3 combined these adversities with actuator lag 
(𝜏 = 1.0s) and erratic obstacle motion (𝜎𝑜 = 3.0m∕s2).
As systematically quantified in Table  16, SAPO-DDPG consistently 
outperformed the baseline across all test configurations. The proposed 
framework maintained success rates above 90% even in Scenario 3 
of the standard environment, compared to TSEB-DDPG’s deteriora-
tion to 58%. This performance advantage extended to the expanded 
scene, where SAPO-DDPG achieved 85% success under worst-case 
conditions—a 34% relative improvement over the baseline.
The expanded environment testing revealed two notable trends: 
First, environmental scale amplified performance differences, with 
SAPO-DDPG’s success rate advantage increasing from 32% to 34% in 
Scenario 3. Second, wind effects exhibited greater impact in larger 
spaces, contributing to the 3.8% additional path length increase ob-
served in Scenario 1. Meanwhile, when scaled to a larger scene, the 
path increment of SAPO-DDPG is smaller compared to the baseline 
model. This is mainly attributed to the processing of extended spatial 
features by the CNN–LSTM module, enabling the model to adapt 
to obstacles of different sizes. These results collectively validate the 
framework’s scalability while demonstrating consistent superiority in 
preserving operational integrity under conditions exceeding typical 
uncertainty thresholds.
The purpose of the extreme condition test is to examine the per-
formance differences between the proposed model and the baseline 
model by increasing the degree of environmental chaos, thereby ver-
ifying the environmental adaptability of the SAPO-DDPG model. The 
experimental results show that with the increase of chaos and site scale, 
the advantages of the SAPO-DDPG model gradually expand compared 
with the baseline model. This indicates that SAPO-DDPG has better 
environmental adaptability, which verifies the advancement of this 
method.
5.6. Experimental summary
The experimental analysis demonstrates that:
(1) AHF provides superior smoothing and accuracy, particularly in 
dynamic environments with complex data distributions;
(2) The enhanced DDPG achieves faster convergence and improved 
multi-objective optimization;
(3) SAPO-DDPG significantly outperforms state-of-the-art methods 
in dynamic environments, with advantages amplifying as environmen-
tal complexity increases.
Table  17 summarizes the characteristics and suitable application 
scenarios of the evaluated algorithms. While SAPO-DDPG exhibits 
longer training times due to its sophisticated architecture, it deliv-
ers robust performance in highly chaotic dynamic scenes, making 
it particularly suitable for mission-critical applications in complex 
environments.
6. Conclusion
This paper presents SAPO-DDPG, a novel hybrid path planning 
framework designed to address the complex challenges of UAV swarm 
navigation in dynamic environments with multiple obstacles. The
framework integrates an Adaptive HANTs Filter (AHF), a Situation 
Assessment Path Optimizer (SAPO), and an enhanced Deep Deter-
ministic Policy Gradient (DDPG) algorithm. This synergistic approach 
effectively tackles the core difficulties of cluster dynamic path planning 
under dynamic interference and multi-objective optimization require-
ments.
Our core theoretical contributions lie in three key innovations. 
Firstly, the AHF model significantly advances the original HANTs filter 
by introducing functional relationships to dynamically update critical 
parameters (error threshold 𝐾, maximum deletion points 𝑁𝑒, low-
frequency number 𝑓𝑛) during iteration, eliminating reliance on static 
manual settings. This substantially enhances filtering robustness and 
trajectory smoothing performance. Secondly, the SAPO model leverages 
a CNN–LSTM architecture augmented with a channel attention mech-
anism (placed after the LSTM) to prioritize valuable spatiotemporal 
features from sensor data for superior situational awareness. It further 
introduces novel path quality evaluation functions and optimization 
methods specifically addressing multi-path and multi-bend challenges. 
Thirdly, we innovate the DDPG algorithm by designing a comprehen-
sive multi-objective reward function (safety, motion stability, traffic 
efficiency, swarm order) with optimized weights (1:15:20:1) and imple-
menting a prioritized experience replay mechanism based on TD-error, 
accelerating convergence and improving decision-making in complex 
scenarios.
These contributions translate into significant practical advantages. 
Comprehensive experimental results, including rigorous testing under 
diverse adverse conditions, demonstrate that SAPO-DDPG consistently 
outperforms state-of-the-art UAV path planning algorithms (including 
APF-RRT*, GA-RRT, B-APFDQN, and TSEB-DDPG) across critical met-
rics. Key advantages include: achieving shortest path lengths (individ-
ual: 2.1% shorter than TSEB-DDPG, swarm: 4.2% reduced), near-zero 
collision navigation, and enabling faster mission completion times. The 
AHF’s adaptive filtering and SAPO’s attention-driven feature extrac-
tion enhance robustness in unpredictable environments (e.g., urban 
canyons), reducing dependency on pre-mapped global data. The opti-
mized DDPG experience replay supports efficient swarm coordination 
with manageable communication overhead.
However, the research acknowledges current limitations. The pri-
mary constraint is the model’s computational complexity, stemming 
from the CNN-LSTM-Attention structure within SAPO and multi-agent 
DDPG training. This results in longer training times (approximately 
29.4 h in experiments) and imposes higher hardware demands for 
onboard inference, posing challenges for real-time deployment on 
resource-constrained or lightweight UAV platforms.
Engineering Applications of Artiϧcial Intelligence 165 (2026) 113518 
18 

===== PAGE 19 =====
H. Zhao et al.
Table 17
The characteristics and application scenarios of several hybrid algorithms.
 Algorithm Dynamic response Multi-objective optimization Training efficiency Application scenario  
 APF-RRT* Low Low N/A Static scenes  
 GA-RRT Medium Medium N/A Dynamic scenes with regular motion 
 B-APFDQN High High Medium Simple and irregular dynamic scene  
 TSEB-DDPG High High Low Moderately random dynamic scene  
 SAPO-DDPG High Dynamic Very low Highly chaotic dynamic scenes  
Future research will focus on addressing these limitations and ex-
panding applicability. Key directions include:
(1) Model lightweighting and acceleration: Exploring techniques 
like neural network pruning, quantization, or knowledge distillation, 
or investigating alternative architectures like Spiking Neural Networks 
(SNNs) to reduce the computational footprint of the SAPO component 
for edge deployment. Pre-train SAPO independently, share weights 
among group agents, or adopt course and transfer learning strategies. 
Use more advanced reinforcement learning algorithms such as SAC and 
Multi-agent DDPG.
(2) Enhanced sim-to-real transfer: Developing robust transfer learn-
ing frameworks incorporating domain randomization to minimize real 
training time and improve generalization to unseen, highly dynamic 
environments.
(3) Heterogeneous swarm management: Extending the framework 
to coordinate mixed teams of UAVs and Unmanned Ground Vehicles 
(UGVs) with diverse dynamics and objectives, potentially leveraging 
hierarchical reinforcement learning strategies. These efforts aim to 
refine SAPO-DDPG for broader autonomous systems applications.
CRediT authorship contribution statement
Hongwei Zhao: Writing – review & editing, Methodology, For-
mal analysis, Supervision, Project administration. Ning Yu: Writing 
– review & editing, Writing – original draft, Validation, Software, 
Methodology, Formal analysis, Data curation. Yanyan Zhao: Writing – 
review & editing, Software, Formal analysis, Data curation. Juan Feng: 
Writing – review & editing, Resources, Investigation. Yu Wang: Writing 
– review & editing, Visualization, Data curation.
Declaration of competing interest
The authors declare that they have no known competing finan-
cial interests or personal relationships that could have appeared to 
influence the work reported in this paper.
Acknowledgments
We thank the reviewers for their helpful suggestions, which signif-
icantly improved the presentation of this paper.
This research was funded by the Fundamental Research Funds for 
the Central Universities.
Data availability
Data will be made available on request.
References
Ajith, V.S., Jolly, K.G., 2023. Hybrid optimization based multi-objective path planning 
framework for unmanned aerial vehicles. Cybern. Syst. 54 (8), 1397–1423. http:
//dx.doi.org/10.1080/01969722.2022.2157607.
Aliabad, F.A., Shojaei, S., Zare, M., Malamiri, H.G., 2024. Investigating the capability 
of the harmonic analysis of time series (HANTS) algorithm in reconstructing time 
series images of daytime and nighttime land surface temperature from the MODIS 
sensor. Spat. Inf. Res. 32, 425–439. http://dx.doi.org/10.1007/s41324-023-00569-
3.
Bo, L., Zhang, T., Zhang, H., Hong, J., Liu, M., Zhang, C., Liu, B., 2024. 3D UAV path 
planning in unknown environment: A transfer reinforcement learning method based 
on low-rank adaption. Adv. Eng. Informatics 62 (4), 102920. http://dx.doi.org/10.
1016/j.aei.2024.102920.
Boulares, M., Fehri, A., Jemni, M., 2024. UAV path planning algorithm based on deep 
Q-learning to search for a floating lost target in the ocean. Robot. Auton. Syst. 179 
(1), 1–15. http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.ins.2024.121714.
Fan, L., 2023. Agricultural uav crop spraying path planning based on pso-a* algorithm, 
inmateh -. Agric. Eng. 71 (3), 625–636. http://dx.doi.org/10.35633/inmateh-71-54.
Fan, J., Chen, X., Liang, X., 2024. ERRT-GA: Expert genetic algorithm with rapidly 
exploring random tree initialization for multi-UAV path planning. Expert Syst. Appl. 
8 (8), 1–26. http://dx.doi.org/10.3390/drones8080367.
Fan, Jiaming., Chen, Xia., Wang, Yu., Chen, Xiangmin., 2022. UAV trajectory planning 
in cluttered environments based on PF-rrt* algorithm with goal-biased strategy. 
Eng. Appl. Artif. Intell. 114, 105182. http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.engappai.2022.
105182.
Hu, G., Huang, F., Shu, B., Wei, G., 2025. MAHACO: Multi-algorithm hybrid ant colony 
optimizer for 3D path planning of a group of UAVs. Inform. Sci. 694 (1), 1–39.
Hu, M., Li, X., Ren, Z., Zeng, S., 2024a. UAV 3D path planning based on a* algorithm 
with improved heuristic function. Acta Armamentarii 45 (S1), 302–307. http:
//dx.doi.org/10.12382/bgxb.2024.0540.
Hu, M., Li, X., Ren, Z., Zeng, S., 2024b. UAV 3D path planning based on a* algorithm 
with improved heuristic function. Binggong Xuebao / Acta Armamentarii 45 (1), 
302–307. http://dx.doi.org/10.12382/bgxb.2024.0540.
Huang, T., Fan, K., Sun, W., 2024. Density gradient-RRT: An improved rapidly exploring 
random tree algorithm for UAV path planning. Expert Syst. Appl. 252 (2), 1–11. 
http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.eswa.2024.124121.
Insights, Fortune Business, 2023. Unmanned aerial vehicle market. https://www.
fortunebusinessinsights.com/industry-reports/ unmanned-aerial-vehicle-uav-market-
101603. (Accessed 22 March 2025).
Jiang, X., Huang, B., 2023. Global path planning of fixed-wing UAV based on improved 
rrt* algorithm. J. Appl. Sci. Eng. 26 (10), 1441–1450. http://dx.doi.org/10.6180/
jase.202310_26(10).0009.
Khalil, H.K., 2002. Nonlinear Systems, third ed. Prentice Hall, http://dx.doi.org/10.
1007/978-3-319-57870-1.
Kong, F., Wang, Q., Gao, S., Yu, H., 2023. B-APFDQN: A UAV path planning 
algorithm based on deep Q-network and artificial potential field. IEEE Access 11, 
44051–44064. http://dx.doi.org/10.1109/ACCESS.2023.3273164.
Kumar, A., Wang, S., Shaikh, A.M., Bilal, H., Lu, B., Song, S., 2024. Building on 
prior lightweight CNN model combined with LSTM-AM framework to guide fault 
detection in fixed-wing UAVs. Int. J. Mach. Learn. Cybern. 15, 4175–4191. http:
//dx.doi.org/10.1007/s13042-024-02141-3.
Liu, H., Chen, J., Feng, J., Zhao, H., 2023. An improved RRT uav formation path 
planning algorithm based on goal bias and node rejection strategy. Unmanned Syst. 
11 (4), 317–326. http://dx.doi.org/10.1142/S2301385023500140.
Luo, X., Wang, Q., Gong, H., Tang, C., 2024. UAV path planning based on the average 
TD3 algorithm with prioritized experience replay. IEEE Access 12, 38017–38029. 
http://dx.doi.org/10.1109/ACCESS.2024.3375083.
Pang, S., Chai, Q., Liu, N., Zheng, W., 2024. A multi-objective cat swarm optimization 
algorithm based on two-archive mechanism for UAV 3D path planning problem. 
Appl. Soft Comput. 167 (2), 1–19. http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.asoc.2024.112306.
Rao, J., Xiang, C., Xi, J., Chen, J., Lei, J., Giernacki, W., Liu, M., 2023. Path planning 
for dual UAVs cooperative suspension transport based on artificial potential field-
A* algorithm. Knowl.-Based Syst. 277 (2023), 1–20. http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.
knosys.2023.110797.
Saeed, R.A., Ali, E.S., Abdelhaq, M., Alsaqour, R., Ahmed, F.R.A., Saad, A.M.E., 2024. 
Energy efficient path planning scheme for unmanned aerial vehicle using hybrid 
generic algorithm-based Q-learning optimization. IEEE Access 12, 13400–13417. 
http://dx.doi.org/10.1109/ACCESS.2023.3344455.
Schaul, T., Quan, J., Antonoglou, I., Silver, D., 2016. Prioritized experience replay. In: 
Proceedings of the International Conference on Learning Representations. ICLR, San 
Juan, Puerto rico, http://dx.doi.org/10.48550/arXiv.1511.05952.
Shao, M., Liu, X., Xiao, C., Zhang, T., Yuan, H., 2025. Research on UAV trajectory 
planning algorithm based on adaptive potential field. Drones 9 (2), 79. http:
//dx.doi.org/10.3390/drones9020079.
Sulieman, M.H., Liu, M., Gursoy, M.C., Kong, F., 2024. Path planning for UAVs 
under GPS permanent faults. ACM Trans. Cyber-Physical Syst. 8 (3), 1–23. http:
//dx.doi.org/10.1145/3653074.
Engineering Applications of Artiϧcial Intelligence 165 (2026) 113518 
19 

===== PAGE 20 =====
H. Zhao et al.
Tang, J., Liang, Y., Li, K., 2024a. Dynamic scene path planning of UAVs based 
on deep reinforcement learning. Drones 8 (2), 60. http://dx.doi.org/10.3390/
drones8020060.
Tang, G., Xiao, T., Du, P., Zhang, P., Liu, K., Tan, L., 2024b. Improved PSO-based two-
phase logistics UAV path planning under dynamic demand and wind conditions. 
Drones 8 (8), 356. http://dx.doi.org/10.3390/drones8080356.
Tian, S., Li, Y., Zhang, X., Zheng, L., Cheng, L., She, W., Xie, W., 2024. Fast UAV path 
planning in urban environments based on three-step experience buffer sampling 
DDPG. Digit. Commun. Netw. 10 (4), 813–826. http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.dcan.
2023.02.016.
Tu, B., Wang, F., Han, X., 2024. 3D path planning for UAV based on a hybrid algorithm 
of marine predators algorithm with quasi-oppositional learning and differential 
evolution. Egypt. Informatics J. 28 (1), 1–15. http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.eij.2024.
100556.
Wang, W., Ye, C., Tian, J., 2024. A 3D UAV path planning method based on multi-
strategy improved artificial rabbit optimization algorithm. Acta Electron. Sin. 52 
(11), 3780–3797. http://dx.doi.org/10.12263/DZXB.20230382.
Wen, C., Dong, H., Xie, W., et al., 2023. Multi-UAVs 3D cooperative curve path 
planning method based on CEA-GA. J. Beijing Univ. Aeronaut. Astronaut. 49 (11), 
3086–3099. http://dx.doi.org/10.13700/j.bh.1001-5965.2021.0787.
Xu, H., Niu, Z., Jiang, B., Zhang, Y., Chen, S., Li, Z., Gao, M., Zhu, M., 2023a. UAV 
trajectory planning based on bi-directional APF-rrt* algorithm with goal-biased. 
Drones 213 (1), 1–12. http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.eswa.2022.119137.
Xu, Y., Wei, Y., Wang, D., Jiang, K., Deng, H., 2023b. Multi-UAV path planning in GPS 
and communication denial environment. Sensors 23 (6), 1–15. http://dx.doi.org/
10.3390/s23062997.
Yu, X., Jiang, N., Wang, X., Li, M., 2023a. A hybrid algorithm based on grey wolf 
optimizer and differential evolution for UAV path planning. Expert Syst. Appl. 215 
(1), 1–13. http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.eswa.2022.119327.
Yu, Q., Xu, Z., Duan, N., Xu, M., Cheng, Y., 2023b. Coverage operation path planning 
of UAV with endurance constraints based on improved ACO. Acta Aeronaut. et 
Astronaut. Sin. 44 (12), 1–13. http://dx.doi.org/10.7527/S1000-6893.2022.27856.
Yu, N., Zhao, H., He, X., 2024. SAPO: A UAV path optimization method through 
situation assessment. In: 2024 36th Chinese Control and Decision Conference. 
CCDC, Xi’an, China, pp. 1161–1166. http://dx.doi.org/10.1109/CCDC62350.2024.
10587411.
Zhang, J., Guo, Y., Zheng, L., Yang, Q., Shi, G., 2024. Real-time UAV path planning 
based on LSTM network. J. Syst. Eng. Electron. 35 (2), 374–385. http://dx.doi.org/
10.23919/JSEE.2023.000157.
Zhang, Z., Wang, S., Chen, J., Han, Y., 2023. A bionic dynamic path planning algorithm 
of the micro UAV based on the fusion of deep neural network optimization/filter-
ing and hawk-eye vision. IEEE TRANSACTIONS SYSTEMS, MAN, CYBERNETICS: 
SYSTEMS 53 (6), 3728–3740. http://dx.doi.org/10.1109/TSMC.2023.3233965.
Zhao, H., Yan, L., Hou, Z., et al., 2025. Error analysis strategy for long-term correlated 
network systems: Generalized nonlinear stochastic processes and dual-layer filtering 
architecture. IEEE Internet Things J. 1–14. http://dx.doi.org/10.1109/JIOT.2025.
3578285, online.
Zhao, X., Yang, R., Zhong, L., Hou, Z., 2024. Multi-UAV path planning and following 
based on multi-agent reinforcement learning. Drones 8 (1), 18. http://dx.doi.org/
10.3390/drones8010018.
Zhong, Huageng, Du, Yu, Liu, Dong, Wang, Minghao, Cong, Ming, Tian, Xiaojing, 
2025. A fruit fly-inspired path planning algorithm for unmanned aerial vehicle in 
underground environments based on low-discrepancy sequences. Eng. Appl. Artif. 
Intell. 156 (Part B), 111250. http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.engappai.2025.111250.
Zhong, L., Zhao, J., Luo, H., Hou, Z., 2024. Hybrid path planning and following of 
a quadrotor UAV based on deep reinforcement learning. In: 2024 36th Chinese 
Control and Decision Conference. CCDC, Xi’an, China, pp. 1858–1863. http://dx.
doi.org/10.1109/CCDC62350.2024.10587648.
Zhou, W., Zhang, C., Tang, W., et al., 2024. A novel modified search and rescue 
optimization algorithm based on reinforcement learning for UAV path planning. 
Control Decis. 39 (4), 1203–1211. http://dx.doi.org/10.13195/j.kzyjc.2022.1209.
Zhu, Y., Ye, Z., 2025. A game-theoretic cooperative path planning strategy using 
hybrid heuristic optimization algorithm. IET Control Theory Appl. 19 (1), 1–13. 
http://dx.doi.org/10.1049/cth2.12766.
Engineering Applications of Artiϧcial Intelligence 165 (2026) 113518 
20 