

===== PAGE 1 =====
 
Contents lists available at ScienceDirect
Engineering Applications of Artificial Intelligence
journal homepage: www.elsevier.com/locate/engappai  
Research paper
Human-in-the-loop reinforcement learning for dynamic soaring: A trajectory 
planning and control integrated system
Yufeng Lu
 , Fangfang Xie ∗, Tingwei Ji
Center for Engineering and Scientific Computation, and School of Aeronautics and Astronautics, Zhejiang University, Zhejiang 310027, China
A R T I C L E  I N F O
Keywords:
Human-in-the-loop
Deep reinforcement learning
Dynamic soaring
Trajectory optimization
 A B S T R A C T
Increasing the endurance of fixed-wing unmanned aerial vehicles has long been a designer’s dream. Inspired 
by the behavior of albatrosses, dynamic soaring holds significant potential for achieving perpetual unpowered 
flight. However, traditional approaches face challenges in implementing dynamic soaring in real-world 
scenarios. Prior studies simplified kinematics and control inputs, and separated design of the optimizer and 
controller. To this end, we propose a human-in-the-loop framework based on deep reinforcement learning 
to enable automated execution of dynamic soaring. First, pseudospectral method is utilized to generate the 
optimal trajectory for learning. Then, deep the reinforcement learning algorithm interacts with a high-fidelity 
environment, sending commands to the lower-level controller. Humans contribute domain expertise and design 
reward functions and evaluation criteria to assist the agent in trajectory search. Our results demonstrate the 
autonomous execution of dynamic soaring without human intervention, with enhanced energy collection in 
thin-shear wind fields. Importantly, our findings are more congruent with practical applications of real-world 
gliders compared to optimal control theory. The scope of this study also contains simple robustness tests 
which indicate the agent’s resistance to wind disturbances and deviations in the initial state. This research 
demonstrates the feasibility of integrating automatic planning and control, accelerating the transition of 
dynamic soaring from simulation to real-world applications.
1. Introduction
1.1. Motivation
In recent years, the rapid advancement and frequent updates of 
onboard electronic devices in aviation have significantly broadened the 
applications of drones (Pieczyński et al., 2024). Among the numerous 
challenges developers face in the drone design process, one of the 
most critical is enhancing the drone’s range and endurance. To address 
this pivotal challenge, energy-saving measures have been pursued, 
encompassing the optimization of aerodynamic shapes to enhance the 
lift-to-drag ratio and the exploration of alternative energy sources, such 
as hydrogen, as a viable substitute for conventional aviation fuel. In 
contrast, researchers have adopted a novel approach, focusing on the 
elongation of endurance by harnessing natural energy resources. Sachs 
and Grüter (2020).
The most common air currents commonly used for harvesting en-
ergy are shear wind and updrafts (Bencatel et al., 2013). The lat-
ter mimics birds in mountain valleys which harvest thermals, and 
this flight pattern has given rise to ‘‘cross-country soaring’’ competi-
tions (Edwards and Silverberg, 2010). Recent research has successfully 
∗ Corresponding author.
E-mail addresses: 22024035@zju.edu.cn (Y. Lu), fangfang_xie@zju.edu.cn (F. Xie), zjjtw@zju.edu.cn (T. Ji).
presented and demonstrated a mature framework using hierarchical 
reinforcement learning to solve the core problem in ascending thermal 
plumes (Notter et al., 2023). In contrast to updrafts, wind shear in-
creases with height in the form of airspeed. Its scenarios have provided 
the impetus for non-powered glider researchers (Mir et al., 2018a; 
Bousquet et al., 2017). The inspiration for this energy absorption 
comes from birds that soar thousands of kilometers over the ocean, 
including albatrosses, which are remarkable as they hardly need to flap 
their wings or stop to feed (Nevitt et al., 2008). Therefore, mimicking 
the maneuvering operations of albatrosses is deemed to be especially 
beneficial for a fixed-wing aircraft to stay airborne for long with-
out consuming energy. Such periodic maneuvers have further been 
categorized by researchers as dynamic soaring.
Extensive research has been conducted on dynamic soaring to 
imitate albatrosses. As a result, a continuous flight mode has been 
proposed for unpowered gliders in shear winds (Sachs, 2016). This 
mode consists of four stages: upwind climb, high-altitude turn, down-
wind dive, and low-altitude turn. Similarly, theoretical possibilities 
for achieving permanent unpowered flight include the ‘8’ shape and 
other traveling patterns proposed by Liu et al. (2017). However, it 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.engappai.2025.111219
Received 12 March 2024; Received in revised form 27 February 2025; Accepted 17 May 2025
Engineering Applications of Artiϧcial Intelligence 157 (2025) 111219 
Available online 10 June 2025 
0952-1976/© 2025 Elsevier Ltd. All rights are reserved, including those for text and data mining, AI training, and similar technologies. 

===== PAGE 2 =====
Y. Lu et al.
 Nomenclature
 𝐴𝑅 Aspect ratio  
 𝐶𝐷, 𝐶𝐿, 𝐶𝑌 Coefficient of drag , lift and lateral force  
 𝐶𝑙, 𝐶𝑚, 𝐶𝑛 Moment coefficient of roll, pitch and yaw  
 𝑒 Oswald factor  
 𝒇 Vector of aerodynamic forces  
 ℎ Height  
 𝑔 Vector of gravity  
 𝑰 3 3-dimensional identity matrix  
 𝐽 (⋅) Objective function  
 𝐿 Lift force vector  
 𝑀 Pitch moment  
 𝑁 Number of interpolation points  
 𝑝, 𝑞, 𝑟 Angular velocity expressed in the body 
coordinate system
 
 𝑆 Wing area  
 𝑉𝑎 Velocity relative to the wind  
 𝒗 Velocity vector  
 𝑥𝑁 , 𝑥𝐸 , 𝑥𝐷 Positions expressed in the North-East-Down 
coordinate system
 
 𝛼 Angle of attack  
 𝛽 Angle of sideslip  
 𝜃 Pitch angle  
 𝛾 Flight-path angle  
 𝜌 Density  
 𝜓 Heading angle  
 𝝉 Vector of aerodynamic torques  
 𝜏 Dimensionless time variable  
 𝛿𝑎, 𝛿𝑒, 𝛿𝑓 , 𝛿𝑟 Deflection of aileron,elevator, flap and 
rudder
 
 Subscripts
 𝑐 Command output by the agent to the 
controller
 
 𝑖, 𝑗 Index variable of the interpolation point.  
 𝑟𝑒𝑓 Reference wind speed at the specific altitude 
 𝑡 Time steps  
is important to note that not all shear wind conditions allow for 
the completion of the Rayleigh cycle. Bousquet (2018) pointed out 
that there exists a minimum shear wind required for the successful 
execution of the dynamic soaring maneuver. More specifically, the 
maximum reference wind speed and the thickness of the shear layer 
induce changes in the tilt angle and cruising radius of the Rayleigh 
cycle. Drawing on the optimization findings of previous studies, the 
glider’s maximum speed is continuously enhanced by blending air-
flow with varying velocities. Sachs et al. (2021) observed that the 
aerodynamic characteristics of a straight wing in the high subsonic 
region significantly limit the attainment of maximum speed. Simulation 
verification suggests that a swept wing mitigates the rise of drag in 
compressibility regions and has the potential to enhance maximum 
speed performance.
1.2. Challenge
Optimization theory has significantly advanced the understanding 
of dynamic soaring mechanisms and provided a foundation for devel-
oping effective control strategies. Most existing work faces challenges in 
implementing trajectory optimization in natural environments. Consid-
ering that energy collection is highly dependent on the attitude of glider 
with respect to the wind, a compromise was made in our previous work 
by adopting an unpowered strategy referred to as ‘‘upwind climbing 
and downwind diving’’ (Wang et al., 2022). However, there are several 
challenges to harvest energy. Firstly, for the sake of convergence of 
solvers, the motion is simplified in previous optimization work through 
the omission of pitch or angle of attack, with the input vector compris-
ing the lift coefficient. Such a simplification leads to modeling errors, as 
the mapping from actuator deflection to angle is missing, not to men-
tion that the lift coefficient is determined not only by the angle but also 
by the damping interference of the angular velocity. Secondly, treating 
the roll angle and lift coefficient as actuators assumes that these values 
can be promptly and accurately reached. In reality, as indicated by 
the analysis based on the optimal control solution, the controller must 
undergo rapid changes and persist in extreme actuator positions (Sachs 
and Grüter, 2021). The quickness, overshoot, and steady-state error 
of the trajectory tracking controller remain to be considered. Thirdly, 
as mentioned above, dependence on the framework of optimal control 
theory alone may result in unexpected trajectories if the glider deviates 
from the equilibrium point under wind disturbances or sensor noise. 
Currently, it is difficult to design a controller capable of simultaneously 
maintaining unpowered flight and achieving perfect tracking of the 
optimal trajectory in the shear wind.
Wind conditions and the operational space within the environmen-
tal range still pose a challenge for consistently imitating the maneuver 
of dynamic soaring. Researchers have gained empirical understandings 
of the dynamic soaring mechanism and harvested the energy from 
shear winds on the windward side of ridges (Bronz et al., 2021). 
From the perspective of unmanned aerial vehicles (UAVs) path plan-
ning, this involves maximizing energy harvesting and decision mak-
ing (Chakrabarty and Langelaan, 2011). For robust control, it involves 
achieving more stable flight in unpredictable wind fields (Kim and 
Perez, 2023). Additionally, the time spent executing on the Rayleigh 
cycle is relatively limited, whether in a poor wind environment or 
within the compressible region of high-speed flight. Preliminary ex-
periments validating dynamic soaring problems in the real world have 
been conducted in Silva and Frew (2016). Attempts by autopilots to 
adjust position and airspeed require the controllers to apply thrust 
to minimize the error between the actual and expected trajectory, 
which consumes power from the propulsion system. Trajectory opti-
mization and lower-level tracking controllers are designed separately, 
leading to errors between the reference trajectory and the real-time 
position during flight tests. Stringent wind field requirements and 
rapid maneuvering conditions impose more precise demands on the 
trajectory optimization and controls of the avionics system. To the 
best of our knowledge, there has been few works done to integrate 
trajectory planning and bottom-level tracking actuators into a system 
for comprehensive consideration.
1.3. Novelty and contributions
To address these challenges, Fig.  1 illustrates a general scheme 
of the proposed human-in-the-loop (HITL) method based on deep re-
inforcement learning (DRL), and highlights the contribution of this 
study. The prior methods solve optimal control problems based on 
simplified dynamics models. They generate flight trajectories that sat-
isfy the specified objectives and constraints. However, we do not want 
to simplify the dynamics model and controller. Instead, we aim to 
construct a high-fidelity environment. The environment is capable to 
accommodate various aircrafts and application scenarios through the 
adjustment of wind and aerodynamic parameters. DRL is utilized to 
handle trajectory planning and control tasks simultaneously. Due to the 
high dimensionality of the state and action spaces, HITL is introduced 
to involve human participation in an active learning manner. Results 
from optimal control theory are used to screen the optimized trajec-
tories, design performance metrics and redefine evaluation criteria, 
thereby enhancing the physical significance of the trajectory. Further-
more, the incorporation of expert knowledge improves efficiency and 
helps prevent trapping in locally optimal trajectories.
Engineering Applications of Artiϧcial Intelligence 157 (2025) 111219 
2 

===== PAGE 3 =====
Y. Lu et al.
Fig. 1. General schema of the proposed human-in-the-loop method based on deep reinforcement learning and differences between the prior methods and the proposed system.
Relying on human control for prolonged periods frequently exceeds 
human endurance limits. Thus, our goal is to integrate the dynamic 
soaring into the Actor-Critic framework to develop an autonomous 
cruising system that replaces human operation. The trained agents can 
perform tasks in scenarios with random wind fields and can handle 
situations where the states of the aircraft deviate caused by estimation 
errors or disturbances from the environment.
In summary, this study makes the primary contributions as follows:
∙ Developed a high-fidelity simulation environment that retains the 
complex dynamics and controllers of gliders.
∙ Propose a framework to implement HITL methods based on DRL 
for dynamic soaring.
∙ Incorporate domain expertise into the RL algorithm and allow 
humans to participate in evaluating the quality of the agent’s decisions.
∙ Achieve the integration of trajectory planning and control, guiding 
the controller to complete the trajectory.
∙ The agent automatically executes dynamic soaring, which requires 
no human intervention and exhibits a degree of disturbance resistance.
The rest of this paper is organized as follows. Previous work on 
dynamic soaring is presented in Section 2, which also identifies the 
limitations of optimization methods in implementing strategies during 
actual flight processes. Section 3 formulates the traditional approach 
to dynamic soaring and the mechanism of wind energy harvesting 
serves as domain expertise for the subsequent DRL work. We construct 
the high-fidelity environment in Section 4. Our iterative framework is 
introduced in Section 5, focused on the details of the HITL method and 
DRL algorithm. The experimental results are presented in Section 6, 
followed by robustness tests, indicating the feasibility of applying this 
approach. Finally, the contributions of this work are summarized, and 
future prospects are discussed in Section 7.
2. Related work
2.1. Optimal control methods
Numerous significant contributions have been made in trajectory 
optimization to emulate the dynamic soaring of albatrosses. Essentially, 
as an optimal control problem, these studies consider nonlinear opti-
mizers to generate optimal trajectories for dynamic soaring. The mul-
tiple shooting method was used to discretize the nonlinear differential 
equations (Sachs et al., 1989), and software was employed to solve for 
maximum altitude gain. Zhao and Qi (2004) discretized the continuous-
time curve into a finite time sequence using the direct collocation 
method to minimize cycle time or parameters such as wind gradient 
slope. This approach transformed the trajectory planning problem into 
a large-scale nonlinear programming problem, which was subsequently 
solved by Sparse Nonlinear OPTimizer (SNOPT) (Gill et al., 2005). Gao 
and Liu (2017) reduced the dimensionality by utilizing Dubins curves, 
potentially compromising global optimality but significantly reduc-
ing computation time. However, these studies only computed energy-
gathering trajectories for reference. Whether the glider can accurately 
enter the anticipative state space requires further investigation. Mir 
et al. (2018b) mathematically proved the nonlinear controllability 
characteristics along the optimal trajectory using geometric control 
theory, addressing this concern. Moreover, the nonlinear controllability 
and stability of the optimal trajectory are not mutually exclusive. The 
contraction theory-based technique was then used to establish the 
conclusion that dynamic soaring with reduced wind shear requirements 
is inherently unstable (Mir et al., 2021). The authors propose utilizing 
optimal control solutions as a reference to design controllers that 
generate pitch and roll commands, thereby promoting stable glider 
operation on the optimal trajectory.
Recently, there have been several studies focusing on UAV control 
in dynamic soaring or windy environments. Haghighi et al. (2024) 
propose an efficient computational framework, which applies pseu-
dospectral method to accurately solve optimal trajectory strategies in 
a windy environment . A Type-2 Fuzzy Logic Controller is introduced 
combined with PID for UAVs with wind disturbances (Moali et al., 
2024). Similarly, A Gaussian Pseudospectral method and a cascade 
dual loop scheme are adopted, achieving robust control and effective 
trajectory generation (Pan et al., 2022). Additionally, a robust MPC 
scheme in unknown scalar fields is proposed, where reference tra-
jectories are generated by an RL algorithm (Li et al., 2024). These 
works exhibit outstanding control effectiveness, even when modeling 
errors arise from simplifications and disparities between assumed and 
Engineering Applications of Artiϧcial Intelligence 157 (2025) 111219 
3 

===== PAGE 4 =====
Y. Lu et al.
actual behavior exist. By combining trajectory optimization with other 
controllers, researchers aim to enhance the UAV’s ability to harness 
wind energy effectively.
2.2. Reinforcement learning
Significant progress has been made in utilizing reinforcement learn-
ing (RL) to harness energy in wind fields. Montella and Spletzer (2014) 
obtained a novel RL controller by imitating the sampling results from a 
nonlinear optimizer, resulting in improved performance compared to 
the baseline teacher controller. Impressive demonstrations by Reddy 
et al. (2016, 2018) showcased the ability of energy-constrained glid-
ers to learn how to exploit and explore energy solely through their 
interaction with unknown thermal updraft environments.
Nevertheless, reinforcement learning is not universally capable of 
handling all tasks without conditions. Due to the challenges faced 
by Q-learning in dealing with continuous glider states, deep neural 
networks, which excel in approximating arbitrary nonlinear functions, 
are employed to estimate the Q-value, an evaluation metric that guides 
the aircrafts’ action in specific states (Novati et al., 2019). The concept 
of updating the action strategy at each step based on the Q-value 
has been categorized by researchers as a value-based learning method. 
Similar to state processing, the optimal actions can be composed of 
roll angles and pitch angles, which can be discretized into multiple 
action groups (Montella and Spletzer, 2014). In practice, discretizing 
the state and action spaces is a compromise to address the physical 
problems. A more optimal approach is to adopt the sample mean esti-
mation (Schulman et al., 2015), which avoids the exponential mapping 
from the continuous space of glider angle inputs to the discrete space 
and reduces the computational cost of fitting the neural network. The 
approach of representing the input actions through a probability distri-
bution function and subsequently optimizing the parameterized policy 
using numerical algorithms is known as a policy-based reinforcement 
learning method (Notter et al., 2023). In fact, the Actor-Critic frame-
work has been proposed to encompass the benefits of each approach, 
handling the limitations of discrete actions while being able to update 
Q-values and policies in a single step (Wang et al., 2016b).
Recent advancements in DRL have significantly improved the au-
tonomy and adaptability of UAVs and other robotic systems in com-
plex environments. Traditional model-based controllers face challenges 
when dealing with nonlinear dynamics, environmental uncertainties, 
and real-time adaptation requirements. To address these limitations,
Ramezani et al. (2023) introduce an LSTM-based Model Predictive Con-
trol (MPC) framework integrated with the Deep Deterministic Policy 
Gradient (DDPG) algorithm for UAV path planning in complex environ-
ments. This approach enhances convergence speed while reducing fail-
ure rates. Similarly, Baek et al. (2022) propose a hybrid control strategy 
that combines linear quadratic regulator (LQR) controllers with en-
semble DRL methods. By leveraging prior knowledge, this method 
improves sample efficiency and robustness. Meanwhile, SAC algorithms 
have become a key method for continuous control. Variants such as 
the Soft Actor Critic Gaussian Mixture Model (SAC-GMM) enable skill 
refinement in trajectory space (Nematollahi et al., 2022), while SAC 
achieves reactive collision avoidance in dynamic scenarios (Nakhleh 
et al., 2023). Additionally, Garg incorporated vision-based DRL for UAV 
path planning and focuses on assessing the generalization from simu-
lation to real-world deployment (Garg et al., 2024). These approaches 
demonstrate performance in real-world deployments. Such innovations 
highlight DRL’s potential to overcome traditional bottlenecks in UAV 
control.
2.3. Human-in-the-loop-methods
Artificial intelligence strives to integrate the advantages of hu-
man intelligence, aiming for effective collaboration between humans 
and machines (Mosqueira-Rey et al., 2023). Integrating expert in-
sights into algorithms creates a HITL-augmented approach, enhancing 
the reliability and rationale of outputs (Sadeghianasl et al., 2024). 
This methodology has found application in diverse fields, including 
medical diagnosis, visual recognition, classification, and recommen-
dation systems (Wang et al., 2016a; Liu et al., 2023). Active human 
feedback has been employed to refine the efficacy of semi-automatic 
annotation (Bonet-Jover et al., 2023). Liu et al. (2019) demonstrated 
the value of pre-selecting datasets for fine-tuning algorithm parame-
ters, which expedites convergence. Expert-machine interaction reduces 
search spaces, simplifying the process of obtaining clean training data, 
making it more efficient (Holzinger, 2016).
To the best of the authors’ knowledge, no existing studies have 
employed DRL with HITL in dynamic soaring. The potential for the 
automated execution of dynamic soaring is worthy of thorough ex-
ploration. We believe that this work can reawaken interest in the 
achievement of dynamic soaring in the real world.
3. Trajectory optimization based on pseudospectral method
This section presents the classical method of generating Rayleigh 
cycle using pseudo-spectral methods. The theoretical basis obtained 
will be utilized as domain expertise, which guides the DRL algorithm 
to enable the search for energy-harvesting trajectories. The optimal 
trajectories generated by optimal control principles will be further 
compared in detail with the trajectories generated iteratively based on 
the proposed framework in Section 5. 
3.1. Mathematical model of dynamic soaring
The point mass model is used to describe flight trajectories. Given 
the representation of shear wind as 𝑊𝑥, the following partial differen-
tial equations can be derived for flights in a wind field:
𝑚 ̇𝑉 = −𝐷 − 𝑚𝑔 sin 𝛾 − 𝑚 ̇𝑊𝑥 cos 𝛾 sin 𝜓 (1)
𝑚𝑉 cos 𝛾 ̇ 𝜓= 𝐿 sin 𝜇 − 𝑚 ̇𝑊𝑥 cos 𝜓 (2)
𝑚𝑉 ̇ 𝛾= 𝐿 cos 𝜇 − 𝑚𝑔 cos 𝛾 + 𝑚 ̇𝑊𝑥 sin 𝛾 sin 𝜓 (3)
̇ 𝑧= 𝑉 sin 𝛾 (4)
̇ 𝑥= 𝑉 cos 𝛾 sin 𝜓 + 𝑊𝑥(ℎ) (5)
̇ 𝑦= 𝑉 cos 𝛾 cos 𝜓 (6)
Where 𝑉 , 𝛾, and 𝜓 denote airspeed, flight path angle and yaw, re-
spectively. In order to control the nonlinear motions, control variables 
need to be introduced. Angular velocity was employed in Mir et al. 
(2018b) for controllability analysis to adjust the pitch and roll of the 
glider. Generally, for the purpose of simplification, the coefficient of 
lift (𝐶𝐿) and roll angle are commonly chosen in trajectory optimization 
methods, although Control command at a lower level offers a more re-
alistic reproduction of the physical processes in experimental flight. In 
this context, the introduction of 𝒖 completes the form of the nonlinear 
dynamics system as 𝒙 = ̇𝑓 (𝒙, 𝒖).
𝐿 = − 1
2 𝜌𝑉 2𝑆𝐶𝐿 (7)
𝐷 = − 1
2 𝜌𝑉 2𝑆𝐶𝐷 (8)
Where 𝐶𝐷 is the drag coefficient. In Deittert et al. (2009), the drag 
coefficient is the quadratic relation of the lift coefficient and is inversely 
proportional to the maximum lift-drag ratio. In our experiment, we 
determined the drag coefficient as the inverse proportional function of 
aspect ratio, which was formulated as follows: 
𝐶𝐷 = 𝐶𝐷0 +
(𝐶𝐿 − 𝐶𝐿0
)2
𝜋𝑒𝐴𝑅 (9)
Where 𝐶𝐿0 represents the lift coefficient at zero angle of attack, while 
𝐶𝐷0 is the minimum of the lift-drag curve. In fact, both approaches 
illustrate the reduction of lift-induced drag with an increase in aspect 
ratio, essentially conveying the same concept.
Engineering Applications of Artiϧcial Intelligence 157 (2025) 111219 
4 

===== PAGE 5 =====
Y. Lu et al.
Fig. 2. The iterative framework which details two subsystems. Subsystem I represents the established environmental subsystem, whereas Subsystem II represents the combination of 
reinforcement learning and human involvement. The environment subsystem comprises various sub-modules, including the wind field module, dynamics system module, controller 
module, and reverse engineering module. Dashed lines indicate data transmission between different modules and subsystems. In II, the left side depicts the structure of DRL, while 
the bottom right corner represents the knowledge acquired by humans from the optimal trajectory, which is subsequently transferred to DRL through the HITL method as expert 
domain knowledge.
3.2. Formula for optimal control problem
Determining the optimal objective is not restricted to a single crite-
rion and depends on the purpose of our investigation. In order to find 
the critical conditions for an extended-duration cruise, the minimum 
reference wind speed was computed by Bonnin et al. (2015). Silva and 
Frew (2016) explored the minimum thrust necessary to conserve fuel 
during flight. Gao and Liu (2017) prioritized maximizing airspeed gain 
as a criterion to maximize energy collection. In this paper, to obtain 
the altitude gain as much as possible under poor wind conditions is of 
great significance. The formulation is presented as follows:
𝐽 = min
[
−ℎ𝑡𝑓
]
(10)
𝒙(𝑡)𝑡𝑓 = 𝒙(𝑡)𝑡0 (11)
Eq. (10) represents the objective function of dynamic soaring. It 
indicates that the goal is to minimize the negative of the final height 
ℎ𝑡𝑓 , meaning the optimization aims to maximize the final altitude at the 
terminal time. When the wind is sufficiently strong, the endpoint of the 
flight will be higher than the starting point. Conversely, when the wind 
is not strong enough to complete the entire Rayleigh cycle, the endpoint 
of the flight will be lower than the starting point. While 𝑡𝑓 and 𝑡0
represent the starting and ending time of the optimization, respectively. 
For the case of finding the maximum height gain, we maintain other 
constraints but remove the restriction on the height. For state and input 
variables, the following path constraints are given: 
𝑉min < 𝑉 < 𝑉 max, 𝜓 min < 𝜓 < 𝜓 max (12)
𝛾min < 𝛾 < 𝛾 max, 𝑥 min < 𝑥 < 𝑥 max (13)
𝑦min < 𝑦 < 𝑦 max, 𝜙 min < 𝜙 < 𝜙 max, 𝑧 ⩾ 0 (14)
 where 𝜙 denotes the roll and 𝑧 is the altitude of the aircraft. The 
inequalities impose various limits on the variables over the trajectory, 
such as prohibiting attitude angles and airspeed from exceeding spec-
ified ranges, with the aim of keeping the flight vehicle in a stable 
flight condition. In our article, the spectral method is applied with 
Engineering Applications of Artiϧcial Intelligence 157 (2025) 111219 
5 

===== PAGE 6 =====
Y. Lu et al.
high-order global basis functions over the entire computational domain 
to discretize the state and control variables, transforming the optimal 
control problem of solving 𝑥 = ̇𝑓 (𝑥, 𝑢) into a nonlinear programming 
problem (NLP). The equations involve solving for the state variable 𝑥
and control input 𝑢 over time, denoted as 𝑥(𝜏) and 𝑢(𝜏), where 𝜏 is a 
normalized time variable. 
𝑥(𝜏) ≈ 𝑋(𝜏) =
𝑁∑
𝑖=0
𝐿𝑖(𝜏)𝑋 (𝜏𝑖
) (15)
𝑢(𝜏) ≈ 𝑈 (𝜏) =
𝑁∑
𝑘=1
𝐿𝑘(𝜏)𝑈 (𝜏𝑘
) (16)
 Where lagrange polynomials are used to approximate the state vari-
ables and control inputs. This approximation helps transform the con-
tinuous problem into a discrete one. The polynomials are mathemati-
cally described as: 
𝐿𝑖(𝜏) =
𝑁∏
𝑗=0,𝑗≠𝑖
𝜏 − 𝜏𝑗
𝜏𝑖 − 𝜏𝑗
, 𝑖 = 1, 2, … , 𝑁 (17)
Each polynomial 𝐿𝑖(𝜏) is associated with a specific time node 𝜏𝑖 and 
they satisfy the property in Eq.  (17). This allows us to approximate 
the values of 𝑥(𝜏) and 𝑢(𝜏) smoothly between discrete points. To ensure 
higher accuracy, discrete points 𝜏𝑖 in Eq. (15) and (16) no longer follow 
the equidistant distribution. Instead, the roots of the linear combina-
tion of high-order Legendre polynomials, 𝑃𝑛−1(𝜏) + 𝑃𝑛(𝜏), are chosen 
as collocation points. In this research, the optimal control software 
GPOPS-II (Patterson and Rao, 2014) and the nonlinear programming 
solver (SNOPT) are employed to solve the optimal control problem for 
dynamic soaring.
4. Construction of the high-fidelity environment
In this section, a detailed introduction to the full-scale environment 
that interacts with DRL, encompassing the wind field, dynamics and 
control system, is provided. Similar to an automated control system, the 
agent is characterized as a parameterized guider, while the glider acts 
as an actuator to execute commands. The environment is comprised of 
everything outside the agent. The agent is a machine to be educated, 
and its final decisions are intensely influenced by its interactions with 
the environment. Consequently, the effectiveness of applying the agent 
to actual flight is largely determined by the realism of the environment.
Thus, the high-fidelity environment is constructed, as depicted in 
Fig.  2I. The glider is firstly reverse-engineered and parameterized. 
Slight modifications are made to the size to satisfy the requirements 
of dynamic soaring. Then, the dynamic system with the controller, is 
modeled based on the measurement. This system receives information 
from the wind field module and provides the necessary state informa-
tion of the glider for DRL. In part D, XFlr and Athena Vortex Lattice 
(AVL) are adopted to estimate viscous-related parameters and aerody-
namic coefficients. The static derivatives and rotation-rate-dependent 
coefficients are calculated using the vortex lattice method and the 
embedded software Xfoil. State information is collected by this module, 
and feedback on the six-dimensional forces and moments is offered. 
An exponential wind field is utilized to generate the required wind 
for dynamic soaring, with the option of adding the von Kármán wind 
turbulence in part C. A PID controller with tuned parameters is created 
in part B to control the glider’s motion.
It is noted that compared to the real-world environment, the simula-
tion environment depicted in Fig.  2I still has minor limitations. In Part 
C, the wind field is approximated by superimposing an empirical model 
with a stochastic process. However, in real-world scenarios, wind fields 
are typically generated by complex interactions, such as the collision of 
incoming flow with hills or the friction of airflow over the sea surface. 
While numerical simulation results can help minimize the gap between 
simulated and real wind fields (Lu et al., 2025), the computational 
speed of Computational Fluid Dynamics (CFD) remains relatively slow. 
On the other hand, in Part D, vortex lattice theory is used to calculate 
aerodynamic coefficients to accelerate the solution process. The nu-
merical discrepancies between the calculated aerodynamic forces and 
real-world values can be attributed to the inherent limitations of the 
vortex lattice method.
4.1. Flight dynamic system model
The state information of a rigid body moving in space is described 
by its position and attitude. Here the orientation of the vehicle with 
respect to the inertial system is expressed in quaternions. 
𝒒 =
[ 𝑞𝑤
𝒒𝑣
]
=
⎡
⎢
⎢
⎢
⎢⎣
𝑞𝑤
𝑞𝑥
𝑞𝑦
𝑞𝑧
⎤
⎥
⎥
⎥
⎥⎦
(18)
where 𝑞𝑤 denotes the real part of the quaternion, while 𝑞𝑣 = [𝑞𝑥 𝑞𝑦 𝑞𝑧
]𝑇
represents the imaginary part. The dynamic system using vector nota-
tion is presented to make the mathematical equations more condensed: 
[ 𝑚𝑰 3 0
0 𝑱
] [
𝐵 ̇𝒗
𝐵 ̇𝝎
]
=
[ −𝑚[𝝎]× 0
0 [ 𝑱 𝝎]×
] [
𝐵𝒗
𝐵𝝎
]
+
[ 𝑚𝐵𝒈
0
]
+
[
𝐵𝛥𝒇
𝐵𝛥𝝉
]
+
[
𝐵𝒇
𝐵𝝉
]
(19)
where 𝑱 represents the inertia matrix. The symbol 𝐵 denotes the 
projection of physical quantities in the body frame and 𝝎 is the vec-
tor representation of the Euler angles. Unlike the simplified set of 
differential equations in Section 3.1, the lateral force is now exerted 
on the glider. Furthermore, in Eq. (19), the solution for the Euler 
angles is no longer skillfully circumvented as in Eq. (1)∼(6), which 
bypasses the rotational motion equations. Most importantly, the com-
plex calculations of aerodynamic forces and torques are determined by 
the following formulas, rather than directly as input quantities simply 
disregarding the positive and negative gains brought by angles and 
angular velocities. 
𝐶𝐿 = 𝐶𝐿0 + 𝐶 𝛼
𝐿 ⋅ 𝛼 + 𝐶
𝛿𝑓
𝐿 ⋅ 𝛿𝑓 + 𝐶 𝛿𝑒
𝐿 ⋅ 𝛿𝑒 + 𝑐
2𝑉𝑎
(𝐶 ̇ 𝛼
𝐿 ⋅ ̇ 𝛼+ 𝐶 𝑞
𝐿 ⋅ 𝑞)+ 𝐶 𝑀
𝐿 ⋅ 𝑀
𝐶𝑌 = 𝐶 𝛽
𝑌 ⋅ 𝛽 + 𝐶 𝛿𝑎
𝑌 ⋅ 𝛿𝑎 + 𝐶 𝛿𝑟
𝑌 ⋅ 𝛿𝑟 + 𝑏
2𝑉𝑎
(𝐶 𝑝
𝑌 ⋅ 𝑝 + 𝐶 𝑟
𝑌 ⋅ 𝑟)
𝐶𝑙 = 𝐶 𝛽
𝑙 ⋅ 𝛽 + 𝐶 𝛿𝑎
𝑙 ⋅ 𝛿𝑎 + 𝐶 𝛿𝑟
𝑙 ⋅ 𝛿𝑟 + 𝑏
2𝑉𝑎
(𝐶 𝑝
𝑙 ⋅ 𝑝 + 𝐶 𝑟
𝑙 ⋅ 𝑟)
𝐶𝐷 = 𝐶𝐷0 +
(𝐶𝐿 − 𝐶𝐿0
)2
𝜋𝑒𝐴𝑅 + 𝐶
𝛿𝑓
𝐷 ⋅ 𝛿𝑓 + 𝐶 𝛿𝑒
𝐷 ⋅ 𝛿𝑒 + 𝐶 𝛿𝑎
𝐷 ⋅ 𝛿𝑎 + 𝐶 𝛿𝑟
𝐷 ⋅ 𝛿𝑟 + 𝐶 𝑀
𝐿 ⋅ 𝑀
𝐶𝑚 = 𝐶𝑚0 + 𝐶 𝛼
𝑚 ⋅ 𝛼 + 𝐶
𝛿𝑓
𝑚 ⋅ 𝛿𝑓 + 𝐶 𝛿𝑒
𝑚 ⋅ 𝛿𝑒 + 𝑐
2𝑉𝑎
(𝐶 ̇ 𝛼
𝑚 ⋅ ̇ 𝛼+ 𝐶 𝑞
𝑚 ⋅ 𝑞)+ 𝐶 𝑀
𝑚 ⋅ 𝑀
𝐶𝑛 = 𝐶 𝛽
𝑛 ⋅ 𝛽 + 𝐶 𝛿𝑎
𝑛 ⋅ 𝛿𝑎 + 𝐶 𝛿𝑟
𝑛 ⋅ 𝛿𝑟 + + 𝑏
2𝑉𝑎
(𝐶 𝑝
𝑛 ⋅ 𝑝 + 𝐶 𝑟
𝑛 ⋅ 𝑟)
(20)
The formulas assume that aerodynamic forces are generated due 
to positive and negative changes in control inputs or angles, such as 
actuator deflections and angle of attack. The torques are also influenced 
by the control surface deflections and flight conditions. In addition, the 
forces and moments take into account the effects of angular veloci-
ties 𝑝, 𝑞 and 𝑟. The lateral coefficients are retained. These factors are 
typically neglected in traditional trajectory optimization.
4.2. Flight control
The aircraft’s motion in the wind field operates without a control 
loop, making it an open-loop system. The PID controller, renowned 
for its maturity, efficiency and ease of deployment in real aircraft, 
is also extensively used in various machine devices beyond aviation. 
Engineering Applications of Artiϧcial Intelligence 157 (2025) 111219 
6 

===== PAGE 7 =====
Y. Lu et al.
As our work progresses towards aircraft applications, we adopt a PID 
controller as the underlying controller to serve the upper-level guidance 
system: 
𝑃 (𝑡) = 𝐾𝑃
[
𝑒(𝑡) + 1
𝑇𝐼 ∫ 𝑒(𝑡)𝑑𝑡 + 𝑇𝐷
𝑑𝑒(𝑡)
𝑑𝑡
]
(21)
Where 𝐾𝑃 , 𝑇𝐼 , and 𝑇𝐷 are the proportional, integral, and derivative 
coefficients respectively, which play crucial roles in determining the 
tracking speed of the reference signal, steady-state error, and response 
lag. The tracking performance of the controller is of utmost importance 
for the upper-level guidance system. In this experiment, we evaluate the 
performance of the PID controller using a ±10◦ step signal.
DRL does not integrate the environment into the optimization pro-
cess directly. The distinct advantage allows us to tailor the complexity 
and flexibility of environment modeling. This aspect is evident in our 
ability to introduce more challenging conditions, including random 
wind fields, sensor noise, and other factors. These uncertain conditions 
are hard to be formulated through a series of differential equations 
in optimal control methods. Unlike the flight dynamics previously 
presented, our interactive environment avoids simplifying assumptions 
in regard to the wind, motion, and controller.
5. Proposed HITL method based on deep reinforcement learning
5.1. The HITL iterative framework
Dynamic soaring can be tricky when relying on humans or AI 
systems alone. Thus, an iterative framework is proposed detailed in Fig. 
2 which combines humans, DRL algorithm and environment integrating 
wind field, dynamics and control system. The algorithm starts with 
arbitrary initialized states which should be aligned with the attitude 
obtained from the optimal control theory. The reward function is 
designed to maximize energy gain and promote energy accumulation 
and retention throughout dynamic soaring. Simultaneously, it is es-
sential to guide the glider through turns in the high altitude region. 
Simultaneously, it is essential to direct the glider to execute turns 
within the high altitude region. In reality, during the initial stages, 
the algorithm often converges towards an acceptable yet suboptimal 
trajectory. Towards the trajectory’s end, the state frequently reaches 
the maximum or minimum angle of attack or roll angle, potentially 
resulting in stalling or rolling. This outcome arises from the changes 
of the angle of attack during the upwind or tailwind phase, which aids 
in energy collection. Furthermore, swift turns during the downwind 
descent augment energy acquisition and curtail energy consumption 
during the turning process.
In the subsequent step, we introduce the concept of the HITL 
approach as shown in the red dotted box of Fig.  3. Through comparing 
the state approaching the termination time, the trajectory that closely 
aligns with the pseudospectral method is manually selected as the 
initial state for the subsequent iteration. Based on the four phases of 
dynamic soaring, reward functions and assessment criteria are carefully 
designed. These interventions, guided by human expertise, integrate 
model training and testing outcomes into the algorithm, creating new 
enhanced intelligence through human participation. This process of 
training and iteration is disclosed in Algorithm 1, which continues until 
the algorithm converges and the agent successfully fulfills the Rayleigh 
criterion task.
5.2. Stochastic strategy
In reinforcement learning, there is no need to explicitly establish an 
accurate mathematical model of the system dynamics because it is an 
indirect policy optimization method. In the initial stage, it uses a policy 
to collect a series of state(𝑠)-action(𝑎) pairs and rewards (𝑅). Then 
it maximizes the cumulative return at current and future discounted 
Fig. 3. The flow chart of the proposed iterative framework where domain expertise is 
embedded through interaction with the DRL algorithm.
Algorithm 1: The proposed HITL method.
Input: The environment and configuration of a glider
1 if not finish dynamic soaring then
2 while not converge do
3 Execute Algorithm 2
4 end 
5 Human: design { 𝑟𝐸 , 𝑟𝑀 , 𝑟𝑃 , 𝑟𝑇
}
6  setting evaluation criteria
7  reinitialize { 𝑷 , 𝑣𝑎, 𝒆, 𝛼, 𝛽}
8 end 
Output: Agent
moments, based on a specially designed reward function. Reinforce-
ment learning iteratively optimizes a new strategy by evaluating the 
next observed state (𝑠′) and 𝑅, improving the return. This strategy 
can provide the optimal action based on the current state. Among 
these concepts, the Markov process serves as a general framework for 
describing the interaction between the agent and the environment, 
defined by a tuple (, , 𝑃 (⋅), 𝑅(⋅), 𝛾). Here,  is the set of action spaces, 
representing actions that the agent takes to change its state. The state 
transition probability (𝑃 (⋅)) describes the probability of reaching the 
next state (𝑠′) after executing an action in the current state. The state 
transition probability distribution of the motion system is indepen-
dent of the previous state trajectory and depends only on the current
(𝑠-𝑎). 
In cases of poor exploration and generalization, maximum entropy 
is incorporated into the reward to address this limitation. The en-
tropy regularization term in entropy-augmented rewards is utilized 
to incentivize the agent to adopt diverse strategies. Additionally, in 
noisy environments, agents trained with entropy-augmented functions 
demonstrate a certain level of robustness against interference. The 
coefficient 𝛼 is employed to achieve a balance between the weights 
assigned to the two terms: 
𝑟(𝑠, 𝑎) = 𝑅(𝑠, 𝑎) + 𝛼(𝜋(⋅ ∣ 𝑠)) (22)
 Where (𝜋(⋅ ∣ 𝑠)) is introduced as entropy regularization at state 𝑠, and 
𝛼 is a hyperparameter that controls the trade-off between exploration 
and exploitation. Higher entropy encourages more exploration. Eq. (22) 
Engineering Applications of Artiϧcial Intelligence 157 (2025) 111219 
7 

===== PAGE 8 =====
Y. Lu et al.
leads to a stochastic strategy, which is then transformed to maximize 
the entropy objective function:
𝐽 (𝜋) = 𝐸𝜋
[ 𝑇∑
𝑡=0
𝛾 𝑡𝑟 (𝑡 + 1)
]
(23)
= 𝐸(𝑠𝑡,𝑎𝑡
)∼𝜌𝜋
𝑇∑
𝑡=0
[𝑟 (𝑠𝑡, 𝑎𝑡
)+ 𝛼 (𝜋 (⋅ ∣ 𝑠𝑡
))] (24)
=
𝑇∑
𝑡=0
𝐸(𝑠𝑡,𝑎𝑡
)∼𝜌𝜋
[𝑟 (𝑠𝑡, 𝑎𝑡
)+ 𝛼 (𝜋 (⋅ ∣ 𝑠𝑡
))] (25)
𝐽 (𝜋) represents the expected return obtained by following the policy. 
𝜌𝜋 is the distribution of the policy. The discount factor 𝛾 allows for 
adjusting the weight given to immediate and future rewards. In extreme 
cases where 𝛾 approaches 1, our agents adopt a long-term perspective, 
disregarding the risks associated with immediate actions. Such agents 
are more courageous, exhibiting increased exploration of future scenar-
ios, as they can tolerate negative rewards from current actions and vice 
versa.
In fact, using a stochastic policy is necessary for the dynamic soaring 
problem. Ensuring the generality and convergence of the algorithm is 
essential for efficiently deploying our algorithm framework. However, 
these two requirements are often contradictory. For instance, certain 
spatial information crucial for the agent to understand the glider may 
not be used to characterize the dynamics due to the variations in flight 
regions during soaring.
For MDPs, there exists a deterministic greedy optimal policy that 
satisfies the Bellman optimality equation (BOE) and maximizes the state 
value. The deterministic policy exhibits outstanding performance due 
to the accurate characterization of dynamics (Barth-Maron et al., 2018). 
If state information perceived by agents is insufficient to describe the 
dynamics, the environmental information is only partially observable 
and the agent may encounter state aliasing. Due to the absence of the 
Markov property, the optimal policy ceases to be deterministic. In such 
a situation, a stochastic policy outperforms a deterministic policy as it 
alleviates the challenges of convergence when facing state aliasing and 
local optima.
5.3. Maximize entropy soft policy iteration
Soft policy iteration is proposed as a general algorithm for maxi-
mizing entropy reward. The optimal policy is obtained by alternating 
between policy evaluation and improvement. Soft policy evaluation 
guarantees the convergence of the true Soft Q-function (Sutton and 
Barto, 1998) defined as follows:
𝑄𝑠𝑜𝑓 𝑡(𝑠, 𝑎) = 𝑟𝑡 + 𝛾𝐸 𝑠𝑡+1∼𝑝𝑠+1
[𝑉𝑠𝑜𝑓 𝑡
(𝑠𝑡+1
)] (26)
𝑉𝑠𝑜𝑓 𝑡(𝑠) = 𝐸𝑎𝑡∼𝜋(𝑠𝑡
)[𝑄𝑠𝑜𝑓 𝑡
(𝑠𝑡, 𝑎𝑡
)]+  (𝜋 (𝑠𝑡
)) (27)
= 𝐸𝑎𝑡∼𝜋(𝑠𝑡
)[𝑄𝑠𝑜𝑓 𝑡
(𝑠𝑡, 𝑎𝑡
)− log 𝜋 (𝑠𝑡
)] (28)
The soft Q-function, 𝑄𝑠𝑜𝑓 𝑡, combines the immediate reward and the 
future return, discounted by 𝛾. The state value 𝑉  is the average of these 
return values taking into account future scenarios. The returns can vary 
among different trajectories. The entropy term  (𝜋 (𝑠𝑡
)) ensures that 
the policy 𝜋 remains stochastic. This is particularly useful to try out 
different actions to find better strategies.
To exploit the characteristics of the distribution of Q-function, we 
define the action-value function as the negative energy function  =
− 1
𝛼 𝑄(𝑠, 𝑎). Minimizing the Kullback–Leibler (KL) divergence between 
the distribution and the previous energy-based policy distribution gen-
erates a new policy. 
𝜋new = arg min
𝜋′∈∏ 𝐷𝐾𝐿
(
𝜋′ (⋅ ∣ 𝑠𝑡
)∥
exp (𝑄𝜋old (𝑠𝑡, ⋅))
𝑍𝜋old (𝑠𝑡
)
)
(29)
Where 𝑍𝜋old  is used for normalizing the distribution. The pol-
icy is further improved based on the probability distribution derived 
from the updated value function. Through iterative processes of for-
mulas Eqs.  (28) and (29), it converges mathematically to 𝜋o𝑝𝑡𝑖𝑚𝑎𝑙. 
This policy maximizes the entropy-based state value, promoting more 
balanced probabilities among the output actions and enhancing the 
exploratory nature of the algorithm. When faced with a large num-
ber of state–action spaces in the environment of dynamic soaring 
that are difficult to collect, the presence of entropy disperses the ac-
tion probability distribution, accelerating action search and enhancing 
algorithmic convergence.
Enhancing agent exploration is critical in dynamic soaring. Opti-
mal control results demonstrate that the Rayleigh ring requires action 
reversal, characterized by alternating actions in opposite directions. 
The exploratory capability of stochastic policies with entropy objectives 
has been highlighted (Haarnoja et al., 2018b). While incorporating a 
Gaussian distribution into DDPG (Lillicrap et al., 2015) also encourages 
random exploration, this approach does not fully address the problem 
of multiple peaks in the Q function. When the reward function encom-
passes more than a goal, it indicates a multimodal task. The benefit 
of the stochastic strategy is that the output is determined according 
to multiple extreme values of the probability distribution. Therefore, 
these advantages of maximizing entropy soft policy iteration make it 
applicable to training agents to perform dynamic soaring.
5.4. Dynamic soaring in soft A-C algorithm
When applying RL methods to high-fidelity dynamic soaring en-
vironments, we need to consider not only continuous states but also 
continuous actions. The policy iteration method in Section 5.3 has been 
mathematically proven to converge for solving the discrete maximum 
entropy optimal policy (Haarnoja et al., 2018a). However, the actions 
were discretized and value-based RL was used (Reddy et al., 2016). 
Adopting this scheme is impractical, as the Q-function for state–action 
pairs has excessively high dimensionality. In the context of the dynamic 
soaring studied in this paper, function approximators are employed 
to extend the solution from discrete problems to continuous ones. 
Similar to value-based RL, deep neural networks(DNNs) are utilized to 
approximate the 𝑉  and soft 𝑄 in Eqs.  (27) and (28), addressing the 
storage and computational challenges associated with high-dimensional 
discrete data:
𝐽𝑉 (𝜓) = E𝐬𝑡∼
[1
2
(
𝑉𝜓
(𝐬𝑡
)− E𝐚𝑡∼𝜋𝜙
[𝑄𝜃
(𝐬𝑡, 𝐚𝑡
)− log 𝜋𝜙
(𝐚𝑡 ∣ 𝐬𝑡
)])2]
(30)
𝐽𝑄(𝜃) = E(𝐬𝑡,𝐚𝑡
)∼
[1
2
(𝑄𝜃
(𝐬𝑡, 𝐚𝑡
)− ̂𝑄 (𝐬𝑡, 𝐚𝑡
))2]
(31)
̂𝑄 (𝐬𝑡, 𝐚𝑡
)= 𝑟 (𝐬𝑡, 𝐚𝑡
)+ 𝛾E𝐬𝑡+1∼𝑝
[𝑉 ̄ 𝜓
(𝐬𝑡+1
)] (32)
Eq.  (32) describes the method for calculating the target Q-value, 
̂𝑄 (𝐬𝑡, 𝐚𝑡
). It consists of two parts: the immediate reward 𝑟 (𝐬𝑡, 𝐚𝑡
) and the 
discounted expected value of the next state 𝑉 ̄ 𝜓
(𝐬𝑡+1
). Then we minimize 
the difference between the current 𝑄𝜃
(𝐬𝑡, 𝐚𝑡
) and the target ̂𝑄 (𝐬𝑡, 𝐚𝑡
)
as shown in Eq. (31). The Q-function is used to compute the expected 
return under the current policy to train the value network 𝑉𝜓
(𝐬𝑡
). The 
experience replay buffer, denoted as , stores memories of interactions 
with the environment. The soft Bellman residual is minimized in the 
form of the squared error. Stochastic gradient descent is employed to 
optimize both Eq. (30) and (31). A target value network 𝑉 ̄ 𝜓 is fixed 
during training and updated every time step.
In policy-based reinforcement learning, the optimal policy is it-
eratively enhanced by parameterizing it to maximize the expected 
cumulative reward. In fact, the A-C framework introduced in this 
paper combines value-based and policy-based iteration to solve for 
the optimal policy. To be embedded in high-fidelity dynamic soaring 
environments, the SAC algorithm is prioritized, which approximates the 
energy-based model(EBM) policy distribution:
Engineering Applications of Artiϧcial Intelligence 157 (2025) 111219 
8 

===== PAGE 9 =====
Y. Lu et al.
Table 1
Coefficients of the reward function designed for different phases.
 Coefficients Phase 1 Phase 2 Phase 3 Phase4 
 𝑐1 0.16 0.2 2.5 3.9  
 𝑐2 −5.3 −16.8 −19.5 26.0  
 𝑐3 −1.6 −2.6 −10.6 −16.4  
 𝑐4 0.0 −3.8 0.0 153.0  
 𝑐5 0.0 7.30 15.8 0.0  
 𝑐6 −10.75 12.70 23.0 −25.4  
 𝑐7 0.0 −30.4 −104.0 −217.0 
 𝑐8 31.0 38.3 57 94  
 𝑐9 968.0 90.3 172.0 312.0  
𝐽𝜋 (𝜙) = E𝑠𝑡∼
[
𝐷𝐾𝐿
(
𝜋𝜙
(⋅ ∣ 𝑠𝑡
)∥
exp (𝑄𝜃
(𝑠𝑡, ⋅))
𝑍𝜃
(𝑠𝑡
)
)]
= E𝐬𝑡∼
[
E𝐚𝑡∼𝜋𝜙
[𝛼 log (𝜋𝜙
(𝐚𝑡 ∣ 𝐬𝑡
))− 𝑄𝜃
(𝐬𝑡, 𝐬𝑡
)]] (33)
Where 𝜙 is the parameter set of the policy network. 𝐽𝜋(𝜙) is used to 
optimize the policy such that it maximizes the expected return while 
maintaining a certain level of entropy. Eq. (33) uses the Kullback–
Leibler (𝐷𝐾𝐿 ) divergence to measure the difference between the current 
policy 𝜋𝜙
(⋅ ∣ 𝑠𝑡
) and a target distribution 
exp(𝑄𝜃
(𝑠𝑡,⋅))
𝑍𝜃
(𝑠𝑡
)  derived from the 
Q-function, where 𝑍𝜃
(𝑠𝑡
) is a normalization factor.
Optimizing these equations is equivalent to maximizing the state 
value function. However, directly sampling 𝐚𝑡 can lead to difficulties 
in gradient computation. To address this, we employ DNNs to update 
policy parameters and enable independent action sampling from noise, 
leveraging their gradient accessibility. By applying the reparameteriza-
tion to compute the expectation with respect to noise, the complications 
are alleviated arising from the distribution dependence on policy pa-
rameters. The pseudocode of the soft A-C(SAC) for dynamic soaring is 
provided in Algorithm 2.
Algorithm 2: The SAC algorithm.
Input: { 𝑟𝐸 , 𝑟𝑀 , 𝑟𝑃 , 𝑟𝑇
} , evaluation criteria
1 Reinitialize state of the glider,{𝜓, ̄ 𝜓, 𝜃, 𝜙}
2 while not converge do
3 for each environment step do
4
{ 𝜃𝑐 , 𝜙𝑐
}
𝑡 ∼ 𝜋𝜙
(𝐚𝑡 ∣ 𝐬𝑡
)
5
{ 𝑷 , 𝑣𝑎, 𝒆, 𝛼, 𝛽}
𝑡+1 ∼ 𝑝 (𝐬𝑡+1 ∣ 𝐬𝑡, 𝐚𝑡
)
6  ←  ∪ {( 𝐬𝑡, 𝐚𝑡, 𝑟 (𝐬𝑡, 𝐚𝑡
), 𝐬𝑡+1
)}
7 end 
8 for each gradient step do
9 𝜓 ← 𝜓 − 𝜆𝑉 ̂∇𝜓 𝐽𝑉 (𝜓)
10 𝜃𝑖 ← 𝜃𝑖 − 𝜆𝑄 ̂∇𝜃𝑖 𝐽𝑄
(𝜃𝑖
) for 𝑖 ∈ {1, 2}
11 𝜙 ← 𝜙 − 𝜆𝜋 ̂∇𝜙𝐽𝜋 (𝜙)
12 ̄ 𝜓← 𝜏𝜓 + (1 − 𝜏) ̄ 𝜓
13 end 
14 end 
Output: 𝜃1,𝜃2,𝜙
One crucial factor that enables the broad application of model-free 
RL across diverse tasks and scenarios is the sensitivity of algorithms to 
hyperparameters. In certain cases, with similar hyperparameters, the 
resulting policy can be locally optimal or even divergent. To mitigate 
this issue, D3QN is proposed with fewer hyperparameters (Wang et al., 
2016c), which expands its applicability to a broader range of scenarios. 
In the context of such challenges, the SAC is adopted, which focuses on 
only a few parameters and enhances algorithm stability.
It should be noted that algorithms capable of continuous action 
have emerged rapidly, such as PPO (Schulman et al., 2017), but they 
also come with the inherent drawback of low sample utilization in on-
policy RL. Since there is no need to take the complex environment 
of dynamic soaring into account, the sample is highly sensitive for 
model-free algorithms. Therefore, off-policy algorithms are introduced 
to establish an experience replay buffer for reuse. SAC combines the 
characteristics of off-policy and random policy, making it particularly 
well-suited for aircraft applications. Unlike ground-based robots, the 
high cost associated with aircraft machinery leaves no room for failure 
or crashing. These events result in significant economic and time costs 
that must be avoided. Even in simulated flight, on-policy is avoided 
as much as possible because it requires experiences far beyond what 
humans need by several orders of magnitude. Thus, improving the 
efficiency of the sampling process is of utmost importance.
5.5. Reward design
When the task requirements are straightforward, the physical state 
and action spaces can be extensively explored without exceptions, and 
a simple reward function is adequate to derive effective strategies 
iteratively. In the case of complex tasks, designing a reward function is 
challenging as it often necessitates a profound understanding of the ap-
plication context. The iterative process will quickly terminate without 
appropriate reward guidance. Our task is to explore the value function 
space as quickly as possible. However, in reality, the environment 
contains an immense number of state–action pairs, making it unfeasible 
to collect them all. A suitable reward function leads the agent into 
the correct state–action-reward chain, reducing the necessity to explore 
excessive state–action spaces and expediting the convergence of the 
algorithm. Therefore, in our article, the reward function is thoughtfully 
constructed, which comprises the energy gain term 𝑟𝐸 , penalty term 𝑟𝑃 , 
mechanism-guiding term 𝑟𝑀 , and terminal term 𝑟𝑇 . 
𝑟 = 𝑟𝐸 + 𝑟𝑀 + 𝑟𝑃 + 𝑟𝑇 (34)
The energy gain term involves the aspiration of the glider to max-
imize energy collection or minimize energy consumption in increased 
or decreased energy phases. 
𝑟𝐸 = 𝑐1𝛥𝐸 (35)
In the pseudospectral method, the principles that climbing during 
the upwind phase and diving during the downwind phase are essential 
for energy collection are recognized. Based on the principle of belly-
to-wind, we divide the state space into five parts: upwind climb, 
high-altitude turn, downwind dive, low-altitude turn, and the area 
outside these four parts. The dynamic soaring task significantly depends 
on a physical background. Therefore, within each region, the agent is 
guided by the principles of the Rayleigh cycle. 
𝑟𝑀 = 𝑐2𝛥𝜃 + 𝑐3𝛥𝜙 + 𝑐4𝛥𝑥𝑁 + 𝑐5𝛥𝑥𝐸 + 𝑐6𝛥𝑥𝐷 (36)
Where, 𝛥 represents the change of states between the current moment 
and the previous moment, for example, 𝛥𝜃 = 𝜃𝑡 − 𝜃𝑡−1, and similarly for 
𝛥𝜃, 𝛥𝜙, 𝛥𝑥𝑁 , 𝛥𝑥𝐸 , 𝛥𝑥𝐷. Note that these coefficients appear contradictory 
to the penalty term shown in the next paragraph or may conflict at 
different phases. For instance, persisting with a downward attitude in 
the downwind phase can frequently exceed the state boundary. In such 
a situation, short-term rewards might be negative, but accumulated 
rewards can be positive. Which action to take should be determined by 
the overall return rather than immediate rewards to avoid shortsighted 
decisions.
The penalty terms consist of state anomalies and exceeding the 
boundaries of the four stages. The action penalty for state anomalies 
is a variation of the constraint in the optimal control theory, serving as 
a warning to the agent to avoid approaching the limits of safe flight: 
𝑟𝑃 =
{
𝑝1 = 0  if in Phase 1 ∼ 4
𝑝1 = −𝑐7  else +
{
𝑝2 = 0  if in normal flight 
𝑝2 = −𝑐8  in danger 
(37)
If the glider fails to meet the state criteria, it is deemed to be 
in an unsafe state, i.e.10 < ℎ < 40, 𝑣𝑎 > 3, |𝜃| < 50 or |𝜙| <
80. Besides, following physics principles, the agent likely possesses 
Engineering Applications of Artiϧcial Intelligence 157 (2025) 111219 
9 

===== PAGE 10 =====
Y. Lu et al.
explicit objectives at destinations. The terminal term 𝑟𝑇 for each stage 
is determined as follows: 
𝑟𝑇 = 𝑐9 −
{ ‖‖‖ ⃗𝑃 − ⃗𝑃𝑖𝑛𝑖
‖‖‖ + ||𝜃𝑐 − 𝜃|| + ||𝜙𝑐 − 𝜙|| if at terminal
0 else 
(38)
Coefficients of the reward function are listed in Table  1. In the head-
wind climb phase, we encourage the glider to climb, collect energy, 
and perform appropriate turns to transition into phase 2. The tunning 
𝑐2 and 𝑐3 are intended to maintain the aircraft’s headwind climb and 
a slight roll attitude. 𝑐4 and 𝑐5 are temporarily inactive. 𝑐6 is set to a 
negative value because, at this stage, we do not want the UAV to turn 
too sharply.
During the high-altitude turn, the glider is expected to change its 
direction while consuming an appropriate amount of energy. At this 
point, coefficients related to position become influential. 𝑐4 and 𝑐5
are activated to guide the aircraft to move eastward and towards the 
ground, indirectly completing the turn. Upon reaching this stage, we 
must reward the algorithm to signal that reaching phase 2 is crucial, 
so 𝑐7 begins to take a non-zero value.
As the aircraft enters phase 3, it has completed the turn and is 
preparing for the descent phase. The main objective is to maximize 
wind energy for consumption in the low-altitude stage. We amplify 
the coefficient of the energy component, so 𝑐1 increases by an order 
of magnitude, while 𝑐6 is doubled. Due to the previous maneuvering 
operations, the glider is prone to crashing into the sea or experiencing 
excessive roll angles. We set 𝑐8 to constrain these dangerous maneuvers.
During the low-altitude turn, 𝑐2 and 𝑐4 become the primary compo-
nents controlling the growth of the reward function. They significantly 
outweigh other coefficients related to attitude and position. This is 
because UAV is required to climb steeply while altering its flight 
direction, making a sharp turn from south to north.
It is important to note that the absolute values of 𝑐7 and 𝑐8 contin-
uously increase. This encourages the algorithm to prioritize long-term 
rewards over immediate gains, as future rewards become appealing. 
Guided by this principle, the absolute values of all coefficients from 
phase 1 to phase 4 increase, ensuring the reward function exhibits a 
consistent growth trend. In addition, C9 is the largest in phase 1. This 
is to guide the aircraft back to the starting point, ensuring that the 
Rayleigh cycle forms a complete cycle.
5.6. Evaluation criteria
Although we have partitioned the reward function into four stages, 
the algorithm lacks knowledge of the glider’s state. Therefore, we must 
analyze the results from optimal trajectories and manually establish 
evaluation criteria based on position and attitude. These criteria fall 
into two categories: range-based criteria, which inform the algorithm 
about the current stage, and endpoint-based criteria, which determine 
if the glider has reached the departure or entry points of phases.
Through the setting of evaluation criteria, the motion information 
is divided into five parts, which correspond to the four phases of 
dynamic soaring and the crash case. We believe that subdividing the 
state spaces significantly reduces the search space for the algorithm. 
Useless samples no longer need to be mindlessly collected. The agent 
collects state–action pairs within a limited information range , which 
leads to fast convergence to the optimal value and policy.
5.7. Parameter configuration
Within the framework of this paper,  represents the characteristic 
information of the glider with respect to the wind field and inertial 
frame. The state is of paramount importance, which should not only 
capture the characteristics but also be easily measurable in real-world 
environments. The horizontal position 𝑷 ∈ R2, airspeed 𝑣𝑎, Euler angles 
𝒆 ∈ R3, angle of attack, and sideslip angle are selected: 
 ∈ { 𝑷 , 𝑣𝑎, 𝒆, 𝛼, 𝛽} (39)
Including 𝛼 and 𝛽 in  is motivated by gliders encountering variable 
wind. In conjunction with the airspeed, these two angles indirectly 
capture the forces, moments, and attitudes relative to the wind.
The output of RL built upon the autopilot is an instruction that 
indirectly controls gliders, as the agent illustrated in the top right 
corner of Fig.  2II. Hence: 
 ∈ { 𝜃𝑐 , 𝜙𝑐
} (40)
Where, 𝜃𝑐 and 𝜙𝑐 are the pitch angle and roll angle command output 
by the agent to the controller, respectively. Overestimation of the Q-
function is a common issue in neural network-based approaches. To 
mitigate estimation errors, two Q-networks and two target networks 
are trained independently, as illustrated by the shaded portion of DNNs 
in Fig.  2 II. An exponentially moving average is adopted to update 
the target network weights with a smoothing coefficient 𝜏. It is crucial 
to carefully consider the architecture and parameters of the networks 
as they are related to the stability of training. Including redundant 
features and sparse states leads to gradient explosion and vanishing 
in Q-function approximation. In our framework, the resulting artificial 
neural network for estimating the Q network has 4 hidden layers, with 
256 neurons in every layer. The policy network features 3 hidden 
layers with 768 neurons in total, mapping state to the expectation and 
variance of each action.
6. Experimental results and analysis
In this section, we first present the Rayleigh cycle generated by 
the pseudo-spectral method and briefly analyze the necessary attitude 
conditions for energy harvesting in dynamic soaring. Then, a compar-
ative experiment is conducted using HITL-based DRL versus non-HITL 
DRL to demonstrate that the agent struggles to guide the aircraft to 
complete dynamic soaring without human in the loop. The trajectories 
generated by the proposed method are illustrated and further compared 
with the optimal trajectories generated by the pseudo-spectral method. 
Finally, robustness tests related to random winds and simulated sensor 
deviations are performed.
6.1. Results from trajectory optimization
The flight region in Fig.  4 is divided into left and right parts, 
distinguishing the Rayleigh cycle flights in strong-wind and poor-wind 
conditions. Their trajectories are represented in black and red respec-
tively. Triangular points in the figure represent the starting position, 
while circular points indicate the end of the flight. When the reference 
speed reaches 12 m/s, the endpoints in the left half lie above the 
starting point, indicating that the glider retains excess energy after 
completing one cycle of flight. This surplus energy can serve as a 
reserve for flying to other areas or for continuing subsequent rounds of 
Rayleigh cycle flight. Conversely, the right half shows energy depletion 
under 10 m/s conditions. To fulfill the requirements of Eq. (11), the 
glider must consume additional energy. The distinctive characteristic 
of soaring in the figure is flying below the starting point.
In fact, the complete closed-loop flight is explicitly considered and 
the objective function is minimized as follows: 
𝐽 = min [𝑉w,ref 
] (41)
Adding the constraint 𝑧0 = 𝑧𝑡𝑓 , we obtain the minimum reference 
wind speed required to close the Rayleigh cycle as 10.78 m/s. This 
result further validates the energy conservation analysis at wind speeds 
of 10 m/s and 12 m/s shown in Fig.  4.
Engineering Applications of Artiϧcial Intelligence 157 (2025) 111219 
10 

===== PAGE 11 =====
Y. Lu et al.
Fig. 4. Two flight perspectives with characteristics of the Rayleigh cycle. The triangles represent the starting points while the circles indicate the end points. The wind speed is 
stronger on the left with 12 m/s and is poor with 10 m/s on the right.
Fig. 5. The state and specific energy of the glider under different wind conditions. The red line represents strong wind conditions, while the black line denotes poor wind 
conditions. In d, the glider lacks sufficient energy to return to the starting point shown in the black line.
Flight state results are shown in Fig.  5. As expected, the specific 
energy at the endpoint is lower than at the starting point to satisfy the 
equality of initial and final states for the poor wind case. Conversely, 
for the 12 m/s case, the specific energy at the endpoint is higher. The 
pitch angle experiences rapid increases and decreases, corresponding to 
the low-altitude and high-altitude turning phases. Owing to the higher 
wind speed, the airspeed at the starting and ending moments is also 
greater than that at 10 m/s. A more comprehensive understanding of 
the state and trajectory for optimal dynamic soaring can be found in 
our previous work (Wang et al., 2022).
The optimal control inputs are shown in Fig.  5c and Fig.  5e. As dis-
cussed in the introduction, the roll undergoes rapid and drastic changes 
to meet the requirements of high-altitude and low-altitude turning. 
However, few attempts were made to design controllers to achieve 
accurate and fast performance. Another weakness is that, during the 
turning process, the lift coefficient and roll angle typically approach the 
aircraft’s aerodynamic and state limits, posing challenges to structural 
load and safety margins. Furthermore, these optimizations prioritize 
simplified assumptions of control inputs. For instance, only the roll 
angle remains in lateral motion. Deflections of the control face and 
Engineering Applications of Artiϧcial Intelligence 157 (2025) 111219 
11 

===== PAGE 12 =====
Y. Lu et al.
Fig. 6. Three-dimensional trajectory generated through HITL-based DRL versus non-
HITL DRL. The triangle indicates the starting point of the flight, while the circle denotes 
the endpoint.
aerodynamic damping are not sufficiently considered leading to the loss 
of aerodynamic force.
Perspective view with characteristics of the Rayleigh cycle is di-
vided into two altitude layers: one corresponds to the area above 
the middle layer, characterized by high wind speeds, while the other 
pertains to the region below the middle layer, exhibiting lower wind 
speeds. This characteristic flight aligns with the phenomenon men-
tioned by Bousquet (2018), where different momenta are mixed within 
the medium. More specifically, the Rayleigh cycle comprises four char-
acteristic flight phases: upwind climb, high-altitude turn, downwind 
descent, and low-altitude turn. In the respective flight phases, gliders 
exhibit distinct attitudes that enable them to harness wind energy 
and minimize energy consumption. These flight attitudes and physical 
mechanisms are mastered by humans. Through the HITL approach, 
humans actively engage with the algorithm to refine the training 
process.
6.2.  comparison experiments of HITL versus non-HITL approaches
Fig.  6 illustrates the flight trajectories guided by the agent after 
training with DRL and HITL-based DRL, respectively. The results of 
the HITL-based DRL training serve as the baseline for comparison. It 
is clear that generating Rayleigh cycle applying DRL alone, without 
expert knowledge, is a formidable challenge. Case 2 represents one of 
the results of training using non-HITL DRL, indicated by the orange 
line. Without human-in-the-loop, the agent is unable to guide the UAV 
to harness wind energy. In the first stage of flight, the aircraft is 
directed to descend too early without reaching a sufficient altitude. 
Furthermore, because of the lack of expert knowledge, the agent fails 
to lead the aircraft back to the starting point. The blue curve in the 
figure represents the results of HITL-DRL. It shows that with human 
evaluation of the agent’s behavior, the UAV climbs to an enough 
altitude and then consumes energy. The agent chooses to give up 
immediate rewards to direct the glider to conduct a 180-degree turn. 
Then it continues to guide the aircraft to dive to harvest energy, and 
finally brings the aircraft back near the starting point.
We attempt to initialize an alternative attitude, as shown in Case 3, 
indicated by the yellow line in Fig.  7. After climbing to a certain height, 
the glider begins to descend while not making a complete U-turn. The 
agent believes that diving to gain airspeed and increase energy is the 
best option. These actions lead to airspeed exceeding the set boundaries 
and a dangerously low altitude, which ultimately results in a crash 
as represented by the yellow curve in Fig.  6. If there is no timely 
intervention from a human operator, the agent would not direct the 
aircraft to climb up. 
6.3. Performance of HITL-based SAC algorithm
Fig.  8a shows the trajectory of the Rayleigh cycle generated by 
the proposed HITL method. In the top view, the trajectory remains 
circular, while in the side view and the front view, it appears as two 
irregular ellipses. These results resemble those obtained through the 
pseudospectral method. The energy color map reveals that the glider 
predominantly gathers energy during the downwind gliding phase. The 
energy acquired during the upwind climb and high-altitude turns is 
counterbalanced by energy consumption, leading to a nearly constant 
total energy level. The energy curves in Fig.  9f provide additional 
verification of this observation. The relatively minor energy variation 
during the upwind climb phase can be attributed to the arbitrary initial 
state of the glider, with energy being utilized to adjust its attitude. The 
airspeed and altitude curves indicate the glider’s near-identical state at 
the task’s beginning and end. Therefore, the starting and ending points 
depicted in Fig.  8a almost coincide. Analysis of the roll and yaw angles 
still allows for the division of the glider’s actions and states into four 
parts, aligning with the four phases in Rayleigh cycle.
The states during the flight process are illustrated in Fig.  9. The 
yellow line represents the actions generated by the policy, guiding the 
aircraft within the environment and producing the blue signals. The 
pitch angle curve in Fig.  9a demonstrates the ability of the controller 
to promptly and accurately track the commands from the agent. While 
this may not be prominently evident roll in Fig.  9c, as previously 
mentioned, reinforcement learning algorithms exhibit adaptability to 
imperfect environments. The agent keenly detects the errors of the roll 
controller and adjusts accordingly in response to the tracking error, 
ensuring the return to the starting point.
Additionally, we observed the algorithm’s tolerance towards devi-
ations in the initial state. It is evident in Fig.  9a, where the initial 
pitch angle decreases instead of increasing directly. This is because a 
deviation exists between the initialized and the optimal state, making 
a direct climb inadequate in approaching the optimal trajectory. When 
the agent adheres to the suboptimal strategy of direct climbing, result-
ing in reaching the boundaries of safe flight or crashing due to limited 
remaining energy, penalties are incurred. The agent, burdened with 
the maximum entropy task, opts to daringly explore alternative actions 
until it approaches the optimal trajectory rather than sticking to direct 
climbing, even though the exact form of the optimal trajectory in the 
high-fidelity environment encompassing all sub-modules is unknown 
to us. The agent progressively steers the glider towards the optimal 
trajectory, thereby ensuring the reproducibility of the Rayleigh cycle. 
While this is achieved in the pseudospectral method by imposing 
constraints on the initial and final states.
The comparison is conducted in Fig.  10 between the trajectories 
generated by the HITL method and obtained from the pseudospectral 
method. The DRL-generated trajectory exhibits smooth state transitions 
indicated by red arrows. In terms of area and perimeter, the optimal 
trajectory appears smaller in the frontal and top views, and in the three-
dimensional plot, it is encompassed by the DRL-generated trajectory. 
The fundamental reason for this is that DRL operates in a high-fidelity 
environment, running on a complete aircraft model with controllers. In 
contrast, the pseudospectral method does not consider these aspects, as 
the roll angle and lift serve as input actions 𝑢 that directly achieve the 
specified state without error. As a result, the climbs and descents in the 
side view appear steeper. In Fig.  10, the side view shows an inclination 
of 41.7◦ between the connecting line and the ground, whereas the 
pseudospectral method exhibits an angle of 64.5◦ as indicated by black 
arrows. The pseudospectral method is expected to exhibit more drastic 
action changes, which can be verified in Fig.  11. The glider completes 
the Rayleigh cycle in 6.4 s, while the system with the control module 
takes approximately 8 s. We also noticed that the extreme actions 
Engineering Applications of Artiϧcial Intelligence 157 (2025) 111219 
12 

===== PAGE 13 =====
Y. Lu et al.
Fig. 7. Partial flight states generated through HITL-based DRL versus non-HITL DRL.
Fig. 8. The three-dimensional trajectory obtained from the HITL method. The dashed lines represent the projection on the three coordinate planes.
in the pseudospectral method are noticeably larger than those in the 
DRL approach. Although this is necessary for rapidly completing the 
Rayleigh cycle, it also places the glider in a region of high-risk flight.
The framework used for training the agent is generic. We modify 
the thickness of the shear layer to make the wind field more severe. By 
reducing the thickness from 12 to 4, we transform the wind field from 
linear to nonlinear. In the challenging environment, the agent decisions 
continued to steer the glider along the Rayleigh cycle trajectory, as 
depicted in Fig.  8b. In a linear wind field, the climbing altitude range 
is about 13 m, while in a nonlinear wind field, the climbing altitude 
range increases to 15 m. Due to the extreme environment, the glider 
took more time to complete the Rayleigh cycle.
We initialize similar state in both wind fields, but the non-linear 
wind field inevitably leads to differences in the trajectory. The glider 
again is successfully guided back onto the correct trajectory. As the 
thickness of the shear layer decreases, the net energy gain of the UAV 
after completing dynamic soaring increases, which is consistent with 
the findings in Bousquet (2018). In fact, the applicability of Algorithm 1 
to diverse wind field types is crucial as the nature of the wind is beyond 
human control. For the deployment of the SAC algorithm on dissimilar 
terrains, it is necessary to determine wind parameters manually, and 
selecting a pre-trained agent is essential.
6.4. Robustness tests
Before integrating reinforcement learning algorithms into onboard 
computers, it is essential to conduct a series of robustness tests. Apply-
ing modern control theory for stability tests or controllability analysis 
becomes challenging when dealing with a multi-module integrated 
environment and strategies. Hence, it is more practical to conduct 
disturbance-resistant tests of the strategies to ensure the completion of 
the Rayleigh trajectory, despite the uncertainty. The performance of 
the well-trained intelligent agent is evaluated under scenarios encom-
passing random wind fields. For situations involving angle and position 
deviations caused by operations, we apply bias to the initialization 
state.
Random wind introduces uncertainty that may cause deviations 
from the desired control performance and may lead to significant 
accidents in gliders. Therefore, the test to evaluate the robustness of 
the trained strategy in the wind fields is conducted. The von Karman 
Engineering Applications of Artiϧcial Intelligence 157 (2025) 111219 
13 

===== PAGE 14 =====
Y. Lu et al.
Fig. 9. The data transmitted between the agent and the environment and the state of the glider.
Fig. 10. The comparison between trajectories obtained by DRL and optimal control theory. The solid black line, drawn manually, represents the degree of inclination between the 
trajectory and the ground.
wind is adopted to introduce stochastic characteristics, as depicted in 
the three-dimensional wind speed in Fig.  12b. The black and green 
curves represent the lateral and vertical wind speeds, respectively. 
The vertical wind speed hovers around zero, while the lateral wind 
gradually increases up to 1 m/s. Fig.  12a and Fig.  12c display the 
action commands generated by the agent for PID controllers, repre-
sented by the yellow lines. At approximately 2s and 5s, the roll angle 
controller experiences slight deviations from the agent’s actions due 
to the influence of increased lateral wind. However, it still exhibits 
a consistent tracking trend. Fig.  12e presents the side view, revealing 
that the perturbation caused by random wind results in a less precise 
overlap between the starting and ending points compared to Fig.  8a. 
Nevertheless, Fig.  12d demonstrates that the altitude and airspeed still 
exhibit an overlap between the initial and final states, with only a 
slight positional deviation. The energy plot illustrates that the total 
energy of the complete Rayleigh cycle is almost preserved, with a slight 
decrease of 2.95 J/kg compared to the initial state, which matches our 
calculation of 2.68 J/kg for the vertical wind in the random wind field. 
It is evident that the decrease in energy is due to the negative work 
done by the vertical wind field on the glider.
The takeoff position will vary with the terrain, leading to deviations. 
Thus, we deliberately introduce a 5% bias in the initial position in the 
Engineering Applications of Artiϧcial Intelligence 157 (2025) 111219 
14 

===== PAGE 15 =====
Y. Lu et al.
Fig. 11. The state of the glider generated through various methods and wind conditions.
Fig. 12. The state of the glider and output of the low-level controller in the presence of random wind.
respective direction to perturb the strategy. The standard trajectory is 
shown as a solid blue line for comparison in Fig.  13a. Our findings 
indicate that deviations to the north have minimal impact on the 
strategy. Conversely, deviations to the east and south result in the 
endpoint deviating eastward from the starting point. The simulation 
results remind us that positional errors in the southeast direction 
may cause a non-overlapping endpoint, highlighting the importance 
of minimizing such errors in real-world scenarios. The heading angles 
Engineering Applications of Artiϧcial Intelligence 157 (2025) 111219 
15 

===== PAGE 16 =====
Y. Lu et al.
Fig. 13. Top view of trajectories with initially set bias generated by DRL.
remain in close proximity to the initial values, as depicted in Fig. 
13a. The agent can complete the Rayleigh trajectory while conserving 
energy plot in Fig.  14a. As previously mentioned, strategies derived 
from DRL with maximum entropy rewards demonstrate a certain level 
of generalization ability, capturing multiple patterns that approximate 
optimal behavior.
Achieving a precise attitude corresponding to the optimal trajectory 
at the takeoff position is challenging. Consequently, considering the 
angle deviation when the glider enters the initial trajectory is needed. 
Modifying the initial roll and pitch angles of the glider, we evaluate 
the intelligent agent’s ability to complete the dynamic soaring. Fig.  13b 
demonstrates the remarkable adaptability of the DRL method. In com-
parison to the reference trajectory, attitude changes do not impede the 
intelligent agent’s ability to make correct action decisions. The angle 
variations are detailed in Fig.  14b, showing initial deviation from the 
standard takeoff angles followed by rapid convergence to the desired 
trajectory. The agent displays a greater tolerance for angle deviations 
when compared to positional deviations. Of utmost significance, it 
accomplishes the task with almost no energy consumption.
6.5. Limitation and discussion
These results provide support for the deployment of DRL on the 
onboard computer. However, due to the inherent intricacy involved 
in deciphering the decision-making process of reinforcement learning, 
proving the mathematical convergence of the iterative framework and 
controllers poses a formidable challenge. A constraint of the proposed 
algorithm is its limited transferability. An agent trained under specific 
wind conditions may not be readily adaptable to arbitrary wind fields. 
The current scope of our work is confined to examining a single 
Rayleigh cycle, leaving unanswered questions regarding the agent’s 
ability to sustain the glider in flight for extended durations.
While a real-world flight experiment represents the ultimate test of 
our approach, experiments are strictly restricted due to extremely de-
manding flight scenarios. The wind fields required for dynamic soaring 
are more commonly found in specific sea surfaces. Another potential 
site for such flights is the leeward side of mountains. This scenario also 
requires a ridge with a certain slope and winds over an extended period. 
In the future, we will find a suitable site for dynamic soaring to conduct 
deployment experiments of the algorithm.
Recent studies have demonstrated the computational feasibility of 
using reinforcement learning for real-time UAV control. Chowdhury 
and Keshmiri (2024) equipped a fixed-wing UAV with an NVIDIA 
Jetson Nano, featuring a 1.42 GHz Quad-core CPU and 4 GB memory, 
which is capable of running a PPO-based RL algorithm efficiently. 
Similarly, multicopters have been successfully trained to perform tasks 
under disturbances using an RL framework. In real-world experiments, 
the onboard computer executes the RL algorithm while the attitude 
is controlled by a cascaded PID controller (Yu et al., 2023). This 
architecture, which combines RL with the lower-level controller, is 
conceptually aligned with the approach proposed in this paper. Another 
study (Wang et al., 2023) has shown that the computational load of SAC 
can be reduced by distributing tasks between local hardware and re-
mote workstations. For example, action computation can be performed 
locally, while policy updates can be offloaded to a remote server. A 
similar distributed architecture could be adopted in our framework to 
balance latency and computational load, ensuring compatibility with 
onboard hardware constraints and real-time performance.
7. Conclusion
Dynamic soaring has showcased the promising vision of perpetual 
flight for unmanned aerial vehicles. However, in order to investi-
gate the energy harvesting mechanisms, the dynamics models and 
controllers have often been simplified. This exclusion of the track-
ing controller in the process of designing optimizers has presented 
challenges when attempting to implement dynamic soaring scenarios 
in real-world applications. Therefore, this study proposes an iterative 
framework that utilizes HITL based on DRL to autonomously exe-
cute the Rayleigh cycle. We revisit previous methodology and expand 
upon prior work. To closely simulate real-world conditions, the flight 
dynamics, lower-level control system, wind field, and aerodynamic 
calculations were integrated into a high-fidelity environment. The HITL 
method combined with DRL in the iterative framework is utilized to 
solve the dynamic soaring problem. Experimental results indicate that 
the trained agent acts as a higher-level guider, steering the lower-level 
controller to execute the Rayleigh cycle without energy consumption, 
bringing the glider back close to its initial state. Our findings support 
the notion that the glider accumulates more energy in the presence 
of nonlinear wind characteristics compared to a linear wind field. A 
Engineering Applications of Artiϧcial Intelligence 157 (2025) 111219 
16 

===== PAGE 17 =====
Y. Lu et al.
Fig. 14. State of trajectories with intentionally set deviations before the start. The blue color represents the reference trajectory, while the points represent the others.
key novelty of this study is the simultaneous search for the optimal 
trajectory and control of the glider. We argue that the proposed frame-
work is well-suited for deployment in real-world applications, which 
provides smooth action variations, accommodates small action limits, 
and integrates well with the lower-level controller.
Robustness tests are conducted as wind conditions are uncontrol-
lable in real-world environments. Random wind fields are introduced 
to investigate the resilience of the agent against disturbances. Our 
analysis reveals that the entropy objective function in DRL exhibits 
a certain level of resilience to random variations in the wind field. 
Furthermore, tests are conducted to simulate deviations in the takeoff 
Engineering Applications of Artiϧcial Intelligence 157 (2025) 111219 
17 

===== PAGE 18 =====
Y. Lu et al.
state, representing drift and bias in the onboard sensors. Our findings 
confirm that deviations in attitude have minimal impact on the agent. 
Regarding the tests on initial position bias, it is observed that drift in 
the south and east direction leads to deviations from the initial position. 
Overall, results are promising and support the conclusion that agents 
complete the trajectory of the Rayleigh cycle. Considering the satisfac-
tory performance of DRL algorithms even in weak wind environments, 
our future focus will be on the deployment of onboard computers on 
gliders. It can be a further effective scheme for applications of dynamic 
soaring in the real world.
The potential scope of the proposed framework extends beyond 
the scope considered in our work. The modular design of the frame-
work allows for customization and modification, making it suitable 
for diverse aircrafts that implement DRL algorithms. Considering the 
expenditure of time associated with training, future research could pri-
oritize optimizing the algorithms to ensure compatibility with various 
aircrafts, thereby improving the efficiency of algorithm deployment. To 
enhance adaptability and versatility in addressing the diverse demands 
of dynamic soaring in different scenarios, a comprehensive automatic 
system can be envisioned, incorporating multiple agents.
CRediT authorship contribution statement
Yufeng Lu: Writing – review & editing, Writing – original draft, 
Validation, Project administration, Methodology, Investigation, Formal 
analysis, Data curation, Conceptualization. Fangfang Xie: Writing – 
review & editing, Validation, Supervision, Resources, Methodology, 
Investigation, Funding acquisition. Tingwei Ji: Writing – review & 
editing, Validation, Supervision, Resources, Project administration.
Acknowledgments
This work is supported in part by the National Natural Science 
Foundation of China (Grant No. 92271107).
Declaration of competing interest
The authors declare that they have no known competing finan-
cial interests or personal relationships that could have appeared to 
influence the work reported in this paper.
Data availability
Data will be made available on request.
References
Baek, D., Purushottam, A., Ramos, J., 2022. Hybrid lmc: Hybrid learning and model-
based control for wheeled humanoid robot via ensemble deep reinforcement 
learning. In: 2022 IEEE/RSJ International Conference on Intelligent Robots and 
Systems. IROS, IEEE, pp. 9347–9354.
Barth-Maron, G., Hoffman, M.W., Budden, D., Dabney, W., Horgan, D., Tb, D., 
Muldal, A., Heess, N., Lillicrap, T., 2018. Distributed distributional deterministic 
policy gradients. arXiv preprint arXiv:1804.08617.
Bencatel, R., de Sousa, J.T., Girard, A., 2013. Atmospheric flow field models applicable 
for aircraft endurance extension. Prog. Aerosp. Sci. 61, 1–25.
Bonet-Jover, A., Sepúlveda-Torres, R., Saquete, E., Martínez-Barco, P., Piad-Morffis, A., 
Estevez-Velarde, S., 2023. Applying human-in-the-loop to construct a dataset for 
determining content reliability to combat fake news. Eng. Appl. Artif. Intell. 126, 
107152.
Bonnin, V., Bénard, E., Moschetta, J.M., Toomer, C., 2015. Energy-harvesting 
mechanisms for uav flight by dynamic soaring. Int. J. Micro Air Veh. 7, 213–229.
Bousquet, G.D., 2018. Dynamic Soaring beyond Biomimetics: Control of an 
Albatross-Inspired Wind-Powered System. (Ph.D. thesis). Massachusetts Institute of 
Technology.
Bousquet, G.D., Triantafyllou, M.S., Slotine, J.J.E., 2017. Optimal dynamic soaring 
consists of successive shallow arcs. J. R. Soc. Interface 14, 20170496.
Bronz, M., Gavrilovic, N., Drouin, A., Hattenberger, G., Moschetta, J.M., 2021. Flight 
testing of dynamic soaring part-1: Leeward inclined circle trajectory. In: AIAA 
Scitech 2021 Forum. p. 1527.
Chakrabarty, A., Langelaan, J.W., 2011. Energy-based long-range path planning for 
soaring-capable unmanned aerial vehicles. J. Guid. Control Dyn. 34, 1002–1015.
Chowdhury, M., Keshmiri, S., 2024. A unified inner-outer loop reinforcement learning 
flight controller for fixed-wing aircraft. In: 2024 International Conference on 
Unmanned Aircraft Systems. ICUAS, IEEE, pp. 556–563.
Deittert, M., Richards, A., Toomer, C.A., Pipe, A., 2009. Engineless unmanned aerial 
vehicle propulsion by dynamic soaring. J. Guid. Control Dyn. 32, 1446–1457.
Edwards, D.J., Silverberg, L.M., 2010. Autonomous soaring: The montague cross-country 
challenge. J. Aircr. 47, 1763–1769.
Gao, C., Liu, H.H., 2017. Dubins path-based dynamic soaring trajectory planning and 
tracking control in a gradient wind field. Optim. Control. Appl. Methods 38, 
147–166.
Garg, S., Masnavi, H., Fidan, B., Janabi-Sharifi, F., Mantegh, I., 2024. Benchmarking 
off-policy deep reinforcement learning algorithms for uav path planning. In: 
2024 International Conference on Unmanned Aircraft Systems. ICUAS, IEEE, pp. 
317–323.
Gill, P.E., Murray, W., Saunders, M.A., 2005. Snopt: An sqp algorithm for large-scale 
constrained optimization. SIAM Rev. 47, 99–131.
Haarnoja, T., Zhou, A., Abbeel, P., Levine, S., 2018a. Soft actor-critic: Off-policy maxi-
mum entropy deep reinforcement learning with a stochastic actor. In: International 
Conference on Machine Learning. PMLR, pp. 1861–1870.
Haarnoja, T., Zhou, A., Hartikainen, K., Tucker, G., Ha, S., Tan, J., Kumar, V., Zhu, H., 
Gupta, A., Abbeel, P., et al., 2018b. Soft actor-critic algorithms and applications. 
arXiv preprint arXiv:1812.05905.
Haghighi, H., Delahaye, D., Moschetta, J.M., Asadi, D., 2024. Uav trajectory 
optimization for maximum soaring in windy environment. Unmanned Syst. 1–14.
Holzinger, A., 2016. Interactive machine learning for health informatics: when do we 
need the human-in-the-loop? Brain Informatics 3, 119–131.
Kim, E.J., Perez, R.E., 2023. Robust neurocontrol for autonomous dynamic soaring. J. 
Guid. Control Dyn. 46, 924–939.
Li, Z., Guo, Y., Wang, G., Chen, W., 2024. Level curve tracking via robust rl-guided 
model predictive control. IEEE/CAA J. Autom. Sin. 11, 2512–2514.
Lillicrap, T.P., Hunt, J.J., Pritzel, A., Heess, N., Erez, T., Tassa, Y., Silver, D., 
Wierstra, D., 2015. Continuous control with deep reinforcement learning. arXiv 
preprint arXiv:1509.02971.
Liu, D.N., Hou, Z.X., Guo, Z., Yang, X.X., Gao, X.Z., 2017. Bio-inspired energy-
harvesting mechanisms and patterns of dynamic soaring. Bioinspiration Biomimetics 
12, 016014.
Liu, J., Li, D., Shan, W., Liu, S., 2023. Continual learning classification method with 
human-in-the-loop based on the artificial immune system. Eng. Appl. Artif. Intell. 
126, 106803.
Liu, Z., Wang, J., Gong, S., Lu, H., Tao, D., 2019. Deep reinforcement active learning 
for human-in-the-loop person re-identification. In: Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF 
International Conference on Computer Vision. pp. 6122–6131.
Lu, Y., Xie, F., Ji, T., Wang, D., Zhang, X., Du, C., Zheng, Y., 2025. Energy-harvest for 
orographic soaring in the monsoon climate. Aerosp. Sci. Technol. 158, 109896.
Mir, I., Eisa, S.A., Taha, H., Maqsood, A., Akhtar, S., Islam, T.U., 2021. A stability 
perspective of bioinspired unmanned aerial vehicles performing optimal dynamic 
soaring. Bioinspiration Biomimetics 16, 066010.
Mir, I., Maqsood, A., Eisa, S.A., Taha, H., Akhtar, S., 2018a. Optimal morphing–
augmented dynamic soaring maneuvers for unmanned air vehicle capable of span 
and sweep morphologies. Aerosp. Sci. Technol. 79, 17–36.
Mir, I., Taha, H., Eisa, S.A., Maqsood, A., 2018b. A controllability perspective of 
dynamic soaring. Nonlinear Dynam. 94, 2347–2362.
Moali, O., Mezghani, D., Mami, A., Oussar, A., Nemra, A., 2024. Uav trajectory 
tracking using proportional-integral-derivative-type-2 fuzzy logic controller with 
genetic algorithm parameter tuning. Sensors 24 (6678).
Montella, C., Spletzer, J.R., 2014. Reinforcement learning for autonomous dynamic 
soaring in shear winds. In: 2014 IEEE/RSJ International Conference on Intelligent 
Robots and Systems. IEEE, pp. 3423–3428.
Mosqueira-Rey, E., Hernández-Pereira, E., Alonso-Ríos, D., Bobes-Bascarán, J., 
Fernández-Leal, Á., 2023. Human-in-the-loop machine learning: A state of the art. 
Artif. Intell. Rev. 56, 3005–3054.
Nakhleh, K., Raza, M., Tang, M., Andrews, M., Boney, R., Hadžić, I., Lee, J., 
Mohajeri, A., Palyutina, K., 2023. Sacplanner: Real-world collision avoidance with 
a soft actor critic local planner and polar state representations. In: 2023 IEEE 
International Conference on Robotics and Automation. ICRA, IEEE, pp. 9464–9470.
Nematollahi, I., Rosete-Beas, E., Röfer, A., Welschehold, T., Valada, A., Burgard, W., 
2022. Robot skill adaptation via soft actor-critic gaussian mixture models. In: 2022 
International Conference on Robotics and Automation. ICRA, IEEE, pp. 8651–8657.
Nevitt, G.A., Losekoot, M., Weimerskirch, H., 2008. Evidence for olfactory search in 
wandering albatross, diomedea exulans. In: Proceedings of the National Academy 
of Sciences, vol. 105, pp. 4576–4581.
Notter, S., Schimpf, F., Müller, G., Fichter, W., 2023. Hierarchical reinforcement 
learning approach for autonomous cross-country soaring. J. Guid. Control Dyn. 
46, 114–126.
Novati, G., Mahadevan, L., Koumoutsakos, P., 2019. Controlled gliding and perching 
through deep-reinforcement-learning. Phys. Rev. Fluids 4, 093902.
Engineering Applications of Artiϧcial Intelligence 157 (2025) 111219 
18 

===== PAGE 19 =====
Y. Lu et al.
Pan, Y., Wang, K., Zou, W., Bu, S., Zhou, M., Li, N., 2022. Dynamic soaring trajectory 
optimization and tracking with adaptive non-singular fast terminal sliding mode 
control. In: International Conference on Autonomous Unmanned Systems. Springer, 
pp. 3114–3127.
Patterson, M.A., Rao, A.V., 2014. Gpops-ii: A matlab software for solving multiple-
phase optimal control problems using hp-adaptive gaussian quadrature collocation 
methods and sparse nonlinear programming. ACM Trans. Math. Softw. (TOMS) 41, 
1–37.
Pieczyński, D., Ptak, B., Kraft, M., Piechocki, M., Aszkowski, P., 2024. A fast, 
lightweight deep learning vision pipeline for autonomous uav landing support with 
added robustness. Eng. Appl. Artif. Intell. 131, 107864.
Ramezani, M., Habibi, H., Sanchez-Lopez, J.L., Voos, H., 2023. Uav path planning 
employing mpc-reinforcement learning method considering collision avoidance. In: 
2023 International Conference on Unmanned Aircraft Systems. ICUAS, IEEE, pp. 
507–514.
Reddy, G., Celani, A., Sejnowski, T.J., Vergassola, M., 2016. Learning to soar in 
turbulent environments. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. 113, E4877–E4884.
Reddy, G., Wong-Ng, J., Celani, A., Sejnowski, T.J., Vergassola, M., 2018. Glider soaring 
via reinforcement learning in the field. Nature 562, 236–239.
Sachs, G., 2016. In-flight measurement of upwind dynamic soaring in albatrosses. Prog. 
Oceanogr. 142, 47–57.
Sachs, G., Grüter, B., 2020. Trajectory optimization and analytic solutions for 
high-speed dynamic soaring. Aerospace 7, 47.
Sachs, G., Grüter, B., 2021. High-speed flight without an engine: A unique performance 
capability enabled by dynamic soaring. J. Guid. Control Dyn. 44, 812–824.
Sachs, G., Grüter, B., Hong, H., 2021. Performance enhancement by wing sweep for 
high-speed dynamic soaring. Aerospace 8 (229).
Sachs, G., Lesch, K., Knoll, A., 1989. Optimal control for maximum energy extraction 
from wind shear. In: Guidance, Navigation and Control Conference. p. 3490.
Sadeghianasl, S., ter Hofstede, A.H., Wynn, M.T., Türkay, S., 2024. Humans-in-the-loop: 
Gamifying activity label repair in process event logs. Eng. Appl. Artif. Intell. 132, 
107875.
Schulman, J., Levine, S., Abbeel, P., Jordan, M., Moritz, P., 2015. Trust region 
policy optimization. In: International Conference on Machine Learning. PMLR, pp. 
1889–1897.
Schulman, J., Wolski, F., Dhariwal, P., Radford, A., Klimov, O., 2017. Proximal policy 
optimization algorithms. arXiv preprint arXiv:1707.06347.
Silva, W., Frew, E.W., 2016. Experimental assessment of online dynamic soaring 
optimization for small unmanned aircraft. In: AIAA Infotech@ Aerospace. p. 0252.
Sutton, R., Barto, A., 1998. Reinforcement learning: An introduction, vol. 1, MIT Press, 
Cambridge, [Google Scholar].
Wang, Z., Bapst, V., Heess, N., Mnih, V., Munos, R., Kavukcuoglu, K., de Freitas, N., 
2016b. Sample efficient actor-critic with experience replay. arXiv preprint arXiv:
1611.01224.
Wang, H., Gong, S., Zhu, X., Xiang, T., 2016a. Human-in-the-loop person re-
identification. In: Computer Vision–ECCV 2016: 14th European Conference, 
Amsterdam, the Netherlands, October 11–14, 2016, Proceedings, Part IV 14. 
Springer, pp. 405–422.
Wang, Z., Schaul, T., Hessel, M., Hasselt, H., Lanctot, M., Freitas, N., 2016c. Dueling 
network architectures for deep reinforcement learning. In: International Conference 
on Machine Learning. PMLR.
Wang, Y., Vasan, G., Mahmood, A.R., 2023. Real-time reinforcement learning for vision-
based robotics utilizing local and remote computers. In: 2023 IEEE International 
Conference on Robotics and Automation. ICRA, IEEE, pp. 9435–9441.
Wang, D., Xie, F., Lu, Y., Ji, T., Du, C., Zheng, Y., 2022. Bioinspired dynamic soaring 
simulation system with distributed pressure sensors. Bioinspiration Biomimetics 17, 
036010.
Yu, D., Xu, M., Liu, Z., Wang, H., 2023. Lyapunov constrained safe reinforcement learn-
ing for multicopter visual servoing. In: 2023 IEEE/RSJ International Conference on 
Intelligent Robots and Systems. IROS, IEEE, pp. 6419–6424.
Zhao, Y.J., Qi, Y.C., 2004. Minimum fuel powered dynamic soaring of unmanned aerial 
vehicles utilizing wind gradients. Optim. Control. Appl. Methods 25, 211–233.
Engineering Applications of Artiϧcial Intelligence 157 (2025) 111219 
19 