

===== PAGE 1 =====
Contents lists available at ScienceDirect
Engineering Applications of Artificial Intelligence
journal homepage: www.elsevier.com/locate/engappai
Research Paper
Layered learning in a quadrotor drone: Simultaneous controlling and path
planning using optimal fuzzy fractional order proportional integral
derivative and proximal policy optimization
Hamed Shahbazi a,∗, Vahid Tikanib, Roholamin Fatahib
a Department of Mechanical Engineering, University of Isfahan, Isfahan, Iran
b Department of Mechatronic Engineering, University of Isfahan, Isfahan, Iran
A R T I C L E I N F O
Keywords:
Deep reinforcement learning
Quadrotor dynamics
Fuzzy system
Heuristic algorithms
Control
A B S T R A C T
Unmanned aerial vehicles (UAVs), particularly quadrotors, have seen a surge in applications ranging from
surveillance to delivery services. However, autonomous control remains a challenge due to the complexity
of their dynamics and the need for real-time responsiveness. This paper addresses the significant problem
of autonomous quadrotor control by introducing a novel learning method that integrates a deep neural
network with advanced control techniques. Novelty of the work is distribution of different learning tasks
in different layers of learning and combining the total learning system in a applicable UAV. The purpose is to
enhance the quadrotor’s ability to perform complex maneuvers autonomously, which is crucial for expanding
its application scope. The proposed method begins with the acquisition of direction control using a fractional
order proportional–integral–derivative (FOPID) controller. The learning parameters are refined through a fuzzy
method, ensuring adaptability and precision. For the optimization of the FOPID parameters, we apply two
stochastic algorithms: Genetic Algorithm and Particle Swarm Optimization, comparing their efficacy. Our
approach successfully teaches the quadrotor to generate and control a flight path autonomously. The second
stage of learning involves proximal policy optimization, enabling the execution of intricate maneuvers. The
experimental setup includes a quadrotor on a test stand with three degrees of freedom, where we validate
the method through rigorous simulation and physical tests. The results demonstrate that our method not only
teaches the quadrotor complex maneuvers but also ensures robust and precise execution, marking a significant
advancement in UAV control systems. The implications of this research extend to improving UAV reliability
for critical applications, potentially transforming the landscape of autonomous aerial operations.
1. Introduction
Due to the increasing use of unmanned aerial vehicles (UAVs) for
military and civilian applications in recent decades, including fire-
fighting, search, and mapping, researchers have become interested in
designing and controlling these UAVs. The design of multi-rotor drones
such as quadrotors has been highly regarded at the beginning of the
twentieth century (Maaruf et al., 2022).
Historical and Current Landscapes of Autonomous Quadrotor Con-
trol is discussed in Asignacion and Satoshi (2024). This comprehensive
review assists early-career researchers by analyzing experimental re-
sults from leading publications to identify trends and gaps in quadrotor
tracking control research, highlighting the precision and speed achieve-
ments in quadrotor flights. In some research projects Reinforcement
Learning and Model Predictive Controller are used (Zhang et al., 2023;
Gu et al., 2024). In Li et al. ( 2022) the research focuses on enhancing
∗ Corresponding author.
E-mail addresses: shahbazi@eng.ui.ac.ir (H. Shahbazi), vahid.tikani@eng.ui.ac.ir (V. Tikani), r.fattahi@eng.ui.ac.ir (R. Fatahi).
safe and agile navigation for quadrotors in complex environments by
exploiting information collected during tasks, addressing the learning
model predictive control problem.
Another deep review presented in de Oliveira Evald et al. ( 2024).
This paper offers insights into various attitude control strategies for
quadrotors, addressing the complexities and advancements in control
techniques. The study in Idrissi et al. ( 2022) Provides an overview
of quadrotor UAVs, discussing applications, design, and control algo-
rithms, highlighting advancements and challenges in the field
Altug et al. developed quadrotor modeling based on the Euler–
Newton method, focusing on sustainability and feedback using images
to design and develop controllers for quadrotors ( Altug et al. , 2011).
Dunfied and his colleagues also designed a neural network-based con-
troller for quadrotors ( Dunfield et al. , 2015 ). Lee et al. devised a
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.engappai.2024.108926
Received 15 February 2024; Received in revised form 6 May 2024; Accepted 1 July 2024
Engineering Applications of Artiϧcial Intelligence 136 (2024) 108926 
Available online 11 July 2024 
0952-1976/© 2024 Elsevier Ltd. All rights are reserved, including those for text and data mining, AI training, and similar technologies. 

===== PAGE 2 =====
H. Shahbazi et al.
sliding mode controller for a quadrotor (Lee et al., 2010). Bora et al.
also designed a hybrid fuzzy controller to control a quadrotor (Bora
et al., 2016). The design of fuzzy controllers has been widely used
for dynamic systems, including the design of fuzzy controllers for
quadrotors (Bora et al., 2016). The PSO optimization algorithm was
used to adjust The controller parameters in the controls. Chao et al.
compared genetic and PSO algorithms to optimize the control gains
of the PID controller (Ou and Lin, 2006). Cheng et al. used the PSO
algorithm to design trajectory tracking control in a quadrotor (Peng
et al., 2013).
Another control technique for the control of a quadrotor is based
on fractional order PID (FOPID). According to the literature, a wide
range of methods have been reported for designing FOPID controllers.
For instance, Dorcak et al. presented a state–space method based on
feedback pole placement (Dorcak et al., 2002). In another research,
Petras et al. introduced the FOPID design based on the pole distribution
of the characteristic equation (Petras, 2000). Vinagre et al. proposed a
different method based on the expected crossover frequency and phase
margin (Vinagre et al., 2000).
While stochastic optimization algorithms are prevailing to achieve
the universally optimal solution, particle swarm optimization (PSO)
and genetic algorithm are optimization strategies from the class of
natural evolutionary computation. PSO, which is used for the optimum
design of PID controllers (Gaing, 2004), is a biologically inspired tech-
nique proposed by Kennedy and Eberhart (1995). A genetic algorithm
has also been proposed based on the process of natural selection that
simulates natural evolution such as crossover, mutation, and selection.
Deep Neural Networks (DNNs) have ushered in a transformative
era in the domains of control and navigation, markedly enhancing the
efficacy and functional breadth of a multitude of systems. These sophis-
ticated networks are intricately integrated within various reinforcement
learning methodologies, thereby establishing deep reinforcement learn-
ing as a formidable approach for mastering the complexities of control
and navigational tasks. special types of deep neural networks such
as Cohen Grossberg bidirectional associative memory neural network
neural networks (Chandrasekar et al., 2022) are embedded in agents to
stabilize the learning methods. It incorporates Markovian jump param-
eters to model the system as a continuous-time, discrete-state Markov
chain. The study employs Lyapunov functional and weak infinitesimal
generator to establish algebraic conditions for ISS (Radhika et al.,
2023).
The cornerstone of this study is the development and validation
of a complementary method for simultaneous trajectory planning and
control of a quadrotor. We propose a layered learning model, detailed
in Section 2, which enables the quadrotor to learn various control
tasks across different layers, enhancing its adaptability and efficiency in
dynamic environments. In Section 3, we delve into the dynamic model
of the quadrotor, setting the stage for the introduction of two control
strategies: the classical PID and the fuzzy-PID controllers. These con-
trollers’ gains are finely tuned using the Particle Swarm Optimization
(PSO) algorithm, ensuring optimal performance. A comparative analy-
sis of these controllers’ effectiveness in the quadrotor’s attitude control
is subsequently presented, highlighting the nuanced differences and
situational advantages of each approach. Furthering our exploration,
we examine the efficacy of optimal-PID and Fractional Order PID
(FOPID) controllers both underpinned by stochastic algorithms in the
realm of attitude control. This comparative study not only sheds light
on the controllers’ operational capabilities but also underscores the
potential of stochastic methods in achieving superior control precision.
Section 3.3 is dedicated to the pivotal aspect of path planning. Here,
we employ a deep reinforcement learning method to not only derive
an optimal path for the quadrotor but also to impart this knowledge
effectively to the UAV. This dual focus on acquisition and execution is a
testament to the method’s comprehensive design. The main role of deep
reinforcement learning, specifically the Proximal Policy Optimization
(PPO) algorithm, in the given problem is to train an agent, which
in this case is a quadrotor, to follow specified paths while being
exposed to unknown disturbances. Additionally, it is used to train the
quadrotor to perform acrobatic maneuvers, rewarding the quadrotor for
its agility in executing these complex movements. The text emphasizes
the use of a simple and intelligent design to achieve these objectives.
The theoretical and practical merits of our approach are substantiated
in Section 4, where we present a series of simulation results. These
simulations serve as a precursor to the real-world applicability of our
method, which is further corroborated in Section 5. In this final section,
we introduce the experimental test bench a platform equipped with
accelerometers, gyroscopes, and a microcontroller. The results obtained
from this physical quadrotor not only validate our method but also
demonstrate its potential to revolutionize the field of UAV control.
2. Layered learning in quadrotor
The concept of layered learning was introduced by Stone in Stone
and Veloso (2000). Layered control systems are a type of control system
that can increase the speed and maneuverability of systems. Control
layers are designed with compatible and harmonious boards that can
send and receive data with minimal bandwidth. Each board or module
is a model of a relatively simple processing system (Prescott et al.,
1999). The upper control layers can be effective in controlling the
output of the lower layers. By launching a layered control, flexible
and resistant control can be applied to dynamic systems. A control
system for designing a completely automatic dynamic system should
process complex and sometimes incomprehensible data from its new
environment at all times (Mirtaba et al., 2023). One of the controller
design patterns for this type of dynamic system is to classify and assign
environmental analysis to a category of operational units. Then, it is
necessary to classify the total system responses to the challenges around
it into different layers (Liu et al., 2019).
Layered learning in control systems is intricately related to the
concepts of distributed and decentralized decision-making, as well
as fuzzy logic, which are the focus of the bibliometric study men-
tioned (Abbasi et al., 2022; Gonzalez et al., 2023). Layered learning, a
hierarchical approach to building complex control systems, often incor-
porates elements of distributed decisions where control is spread across
multiple nodes or layers, and decentralized decisions where each layer
operates semi-independently. Fuzzy logic, frequently used within these
layers, allows for handling uncertainty and imprecision, enhancing the
system’s ability to make nuanced decisions. The study’s analysis of
literature from 1995 to 2023 highlights the growing importance and
interconnection of these concepts within the field (Çağlayan et al.,
2024). By visualizing relationships through social network analysis, the
study underscores the significant impact of these keywords on research
advancements. This correlation suggests that layered learning, as an
application of these principles, benefits from the collective insights
and developments reported in the surveyed articles, contributing to the
evolution of intelligent control systems.
The principles of this method are based on a layered structure
that has been used in the construction of intelligent pilots, which has
increased the level of intelligence of the quadrotor by more than a few
stages. In essence, instead of being monopolized by a unique system,
the controllability of the quadrotor is achieved by a system composed
of several agents. All control agents are placed in a separate layer and
autonomously make decisions with independent processors, memory,
and peripherals. In this section, each layer has a special responsibility,
and some of the responsibilities of the layers complement each other.
The layered structure of this intelligent pilot has many applications
and advantages. Fig. 1 shows the overall structure of this intelligent
pilot and the relationships between its layers. In this figure each layer
serves a unique function, from motor speed regulation to advanced
navigational computations, forming an intelligent, multi-agent control
structure.
Engineering Applications of Artiϧcial Intelligence 136 (2024) 108926 
2 

===== PAGE 3 =====
H. Shahbazi et al.
Fig. 1. Proposed layered learning structure in this paper.
The motivation behind this method is to enhance the control sys-
tem’s ability to process complex and dynamic environmental data
efficiently. Implementing layered learning in drone technology en-
hances flexibility and resilience, offering several key benefits. It leads
to increased speed and maneuverability as tasks are distributed across
multiple layers, allowing the system to quickly adapt to environmen-
tal changes and improve the drone’s agility. The approach also aug-
ments system intelligence; with each layer operating autonomously
and equipped with its own processing capabilities, decision-making
becomes more sophisticated. The modular nature of layered systems
ensures scalability, enabling the integration of new layers or alterations
to existing ones without systemic disruption. This method also ensures
robustness, providing a framework capable of withstanding dynamic
changes and uncertainties. Furthermore, the harmonious design of
control layers guarantees compatibility, facilitating efficient data ex-
change and coordination, which results in a cohesive control strategy.
In essence, the layered learning method is designed to foster the de-
velopment of drones that are smarter, more adaptable, and efficient,
particularly adept at navigating through complex and unpredictable
environments.
As shown in Fig. 1 the first layer is responsible for the speed control
of the motors, which can sense the electric currents and control the
rotational speed. In the second layer of This structure, a group of
sensors and electronic boards are used to control and manage the
data and classify them. One of the most important sensors in this
layer is the IMU, which is a combination of an accelerometer and a
magnetometer. This sensor calculates all the angular parameters and
angular velocities. This layer uses a smart processor and the desired
peripherals to calculate roll, pitch, and yaw angles. It is programmed
in C language code and communicates with the computer via a USB
cable.
After detecting the path in the second layer, the third layer of the
layered control structure calculates the roll, pitch, yaw, and angular
velocity of the quadrotor for navigating the path. In processing this
layer, in addition to receiving moment-by-moment information from
other sensors and previous layers, the linear velocity of the quadrotor’s
center of mass must also be calculated and applied in the calculation
of rewards and penalties in the processor layers. The processor used in
this layer must be more powerful than the processors in the previous
layers, and the amount of memory and other peripherals in this layer
may also be greater by this amount.
Fig. 2. Illustration of the quadrotor as a MIMO system with inter-axis coupling.
Fig. 1 shows that the fourth layer is used to learn high level
tasks. In this layer, the processor calculates the motor speed at each
moment after calculating the roll, pitch, yaw, and linear velocity of the
quadrotor. In this layer, various learning policies such as PPO, AC, and
linear and nonlinear controllers are used to process data. The processor
used in this layer must be more powerful than the processors in the
previous layers, and the amount of memory and other peripherals in
this layer may also be greater by this amount. In this layer, the speed
of each of the four quad motors is adjusted such that the quad is
positioned at the desired coordinate and angle.
3. Problem modeling
3.1. Dynamic model of quadrotor
The quadrotor is defined as a Multiple Input Multiple Output
(MIMO) system, demonstrating significant inter-axis coupling and un-
deractuation. It features six degrees of freedom while being equipped
with only four rotors for control. This configuration necessitates intri-
cate control strategies to manage its movement, as illustrated in Fig. 2.
The quadrotor’s design integrates four rotors directly connected to its
central body, enabling aerial maneuverability.
Engineering Applications of Artiϧcial Intelligence 136 (2024) 108926 
3 

===== PAGE 4 =====
H. Shahbazi et al.
Fig. 3. Depiction of the quadrotor’s propeller configuration.
As shown in Fig. 3, through changing the rotor speed, the two pairs
of propellers 1, 3 and 2, 4 rotate in contrary directions. To generate
vertical motion, the four propeller’s speeds simultaneously increased
or decrease. Roll rotation along with lateral motion is produced by
changing the 2 and 4 propeller’s speed. Change in 1 and 3 propeller’s
speed results in Pitch rotation and the corresponding lateral motion.
Yaw rotation results from the difference in the counter torque
between each pair of propellers. According to literature, dynamic equa-
tions of quadrotor are producible by several methods (Sabatino, 2015).
In accordance with the ideal, a model combines the nonlinear gy-
roscopic effects arise from the rigid body rotation in space and the
propulsion rotors rotation. The nonlinear equations of motion are de-
rived from the dynamic model is developed in Kennedy and Eberhart
(1995). Gyroscopic effects arise from the propeller rotation coupled
with the body rotation. The propeller gyroscopic effects for roll and
pitch are respectively 𝐽𝑟 ̇ 𝜑Ω𝑟, 𝐽𝑟 ̇𝜃Ω𝑟. So the nonlinear equations are
given by (Bouabdallah, 2007):
𝐼𝑥𝑥 ̈ 𝜑= ̇𝜃 ̇ 𝜓(𝐼𝑦𝑦 − 𝐼𝑧𝑧
)+ 𝐽𝑟 ̇𝜃𝛺𝑟 + 𝑙 (−𝑇2 + 𝑇4
)+ (−1)𝑖+1
4∑
𝑖=1
𝑅𝑚𝑥𝑖 − ℎ
4∑
𝑖=1
𝐻𝑦𝑖
(1)
𝐼𝑦𝑦 ̈𝜃 = ̇ 𝜓 ̇ 𝜑(𝐼𝑧𝑧 − 𝐼𝑥𝑥
)+ 𝐽𝑟 ̇𝜙𝛺𝑟 + 𝑙 (−𝑇1 − 𝑇3
)+ (−1)𝑖+1
4∑
𝑖=1
𝑅𝑚𝑦𝑖 + ℎ
4∑
𝑖=1
𝐻𝑥𝑖
(2)
𝐼𝑧𝑧 ̈ 𝜓= ̇𝜃 ̇ 𝜑(𝐼𝑥𝑥 − 𝐼𝑦𝑦
)+ 𝐽𝑟𝛺𝑟 + 𝑙 (𝐻𝑥2 − 𝐻𝑥4
)+ 𝑙(−𝐻𝑦1 + 𝐻𝑦3) (3)
𝑚 ̈ 𝑧= 𝑚𝑔 − (𝑐𝜓𝑐𝜙 )
4∑
𝑖=1
𝑇𝑖 (4)
𝑚 ̈ 𝑥= (𝑠𝜓𝑠𝜙 + 𝑐𝜓𝑠𝜃𝑐𝜙 )
4∑
𝑖=1
𝑇𝑖 − 1
2 𝐶𝑥𝐴𝑐 𝜌 ̇ 𝑥| ̇ 𝑥| (5)
𝑚 ̈ 𝑦= (−𝑐𝜓𝑠𝜙 + 𝑠𝜓𝑠𝜃𝑠𝜙 )
4∑
𝑖=1
𝑇𝑖 − 1
2 𝐶𝑦𝐴𝑐 𝜌 ̇ 𝑦| ̇ 𝑦| (6)
The state–space ̇𝑋 = 𝑓 (𝑋, 𝑈 ) form of quadrotor model can be
written from Eqs. (1)–(6) with U as inputs and 𝑋 as state vector which
is defined as follow ( Gaing, 2004):
𝑋 = [𝜙 ̇𝜙 𝜃 ̇𝜃 𝜓 ̇ 𝜓 𝑧 ̇ 𝑧 𝑥 ̇ 𝑥 𝑦 ̇ 𝑦 ] (7)
𝑈 = [𝑈1 𝑈2 𝑈3 𝑈4] (8)
Inputs are given by:
𝑈1 =
4∑
𝑖=1
𝑇𝐼 = 𝑏(𝛺2
1 + 𝛺2
2 + 𝛺2
3 + 𝛺2
4) (9)
𝑈2 = (−𝑇2 + 𝑇4
)= 𝑏(−𝛺2
2 + 𝛺2
4) (10)
𝑈3 = (𝑇1 + 𝑇3
)= 𝑏(𝛺2
1 − 𝛺2
3) (11)
𝑈4 = 𝑑 (−𝛺2
1 + 𝛺2
2 − 𝛺2
3 + 𝛺2
4
) (12)
So the overall quadrotor dynamic model can be described by the
following equations (Bouabdallah, 2007):
̈ 𝑥= (cos 𝜙 sin 𝜃 cos 𝜓 + sin 𝜙 sin 𝜓) 𝑈1
𝑚 (13)
̈ 𝑦= (cos 𝜙 sin 𝜃 sin 𝜓 − sin 𝜙 cos 𝜓) 𝑈1
𝑚 (14)
̈ 𝑧= −𝑔 + (cos 𝜙 cos 𝜃) 𝑈1
𝑚 (15)
̈𝜙 = ̇𝜃 ̇ 𝜓
[𝐼𝑦𝑦 − 𝐼𝑧𝑧
𝐼𝑥𝑥
]
+ 𝐽𝑟
𝐼𝑥𝑥
̇𝜃𝛺𝑟 + 1
𝐼𝑥𝑥
𝑈2 (16)
̈𝜃 = ̇𝜙 ̇ 𝜓
[𝐼𝑧𝑧 − 𝐼𝑥𝑥
𝐼𝑦𝑦
]
− 𝐽𝑟
𝐼𝑦𝑦
̇𝜙𝛺𝑟 + 1
𝐼𝑦𝑦
𝑈3 (17)
̈ 𝜓= ̇𝜃 ̇𝜙
[𝐼𝑥𝑥 − 𝐼𝑦𝑦
𝐼𝑧𝑧
]
+ 1
𝐼𝑦𝑦
𝑈4 (18)
3.2. Learning to control attitude
Due to very good determination of dynamic model, In the attitude
control layer, model based controllers are used. Learning in this layer is
usually is some parameter learning of classical or nonlinear controllers.
In the following, three controllers are designed for quadrotor stabiliza-
tion, and their parameters will be learned using some metaheuristic
methods:
1. Classical proportional–integral–derivative (PID) controller
2. PID controller using a fuzzy system to adjust control gains
3. Fractional order PID.
As indicated, control inputs are identified by equations. Three con-
trol inputs, 𝑈2, 𝑈3 and 𝑈4 are produced to control the quadrotor’s
attitude, and they control Roll, Pitch, and Yaw motions.
In the following, two controllers are designed for quadrotor stabi-
lization; classical proportional–integral–derivative (PID) controller and
PID controller using a fuzzy system to adjust control gains. Three
control inputs, 𝑈2, 𝑈3 and 𝑈4 are produced to control the quadrotor’s
attitude, and they control Roll, Pitch, and Yaw motions.
Classical-proportional–integral–derivative controller is a type of
feedback-based controller that is used predominantly in control sys-
tems. Due to the simple structure and robust performance of this
type of controller, its design and implementation is very common in
the industries. The general relationship governing on the classical-
proportional–integral–derivative controller is as follows:
𝑢(𝑡) = 𝐾𝑝𝑒(𝑡) + 𝐾𝐼 ∫
𝑡
0
𝑒(𝑡) + 𝐾𝐷
𝑑
𝑑𝑡 𝑒(𝑡) (19)
Engineering Applications of Artiϧcial Intelligence 136 (2024) 108926 
4 

===== PAGE 5 =====
H. Shahbazi et al.
Fig. 4. Membership function for 𝑒 and ̇ 𝑒,.
The control gain, 𝐾𝑝, is the control feedback with respect to the
error between the optimal amount and the actual value. Derivative
control gain, 𝐾𝐷, is the control feedback to the error rate, and integral
control gain, 𝐾𝐼, is control feedback to the sum of the error values
which included in the control input. For attitude control of the quadro-
tor, three 𝑈2, 𝑈3 and 𝑈4 control inputs are produced to control the
direction of Roll, Pitch, and Yaw.
3.2.1. Fuzzy gain learning
The design of a PID controller with the desired performance, de-
pends on the leaning of the controller gain values. In the next step, a
fuzzy system has been designed to determine the control gain instan-
taneously. A fuzzy controller operates based on the PID controller and
modifies the control gain values based on a fuzzy logic instantaneously,
so that the system has a favorable response. Using predetermined fuzzy
rules, and by taking error parameters and error derivative at any instant
as inputs, the PID fuzzy system changes the values of controller’s gain.
Fuzzy controller rules define the relationship between the error and
error derivative with the control gain coefficient. As shown in Fig. 4 ,
seven parameters are assigned to define the error membership functions
and error derivative in the fuzzy system, and with this, the numerical
values are converted to fuzzy definitions.
In order to estimate the control gains, three values of 𝛼𝑃 , 𝛼𝐷, and 𝛼𝐼
are considered as the fuzzy system output within the range of [ −1,1].
Then, using Eqs. (20)–(22), the control gains are obtained between the
considered upper and lower limits.
𝐾𝑃 = (𝐾𝑃 ,𝑚𝑎𝑥 − 𝐾𝑃 ,𝑚𝑖𝑛
)𝛼𝑃 + 𝐾𝑃 ,𝑚𝑖𝑛 (20)
𝐾𝐷 = (𝐾𝐷,𝑚𝑎𝑥 − 𝐾𝐷,𝑚𝑖𝑛
)𝛼𝐷 + 𝐾𝐷,𝑚𝑖𝑛 (21)
𝐾𝐼 = (𝐾𝐼,𝑚𝑎𝑥 − 𝐾𝐼,𝑚𝑖𝑛
)𝛼𝐼 + 𝐾𝐼,𝑚𝑖𝑛 (22)
As shown in Fig. 5 , the parameters S and B are used to define the
fuzzy system output membership functions.
The most important part of designing fuzzy controller-PID is the
definition of linguistic rules. Linguistic rules specify the conditions for
each output with respect to the quality of input values, 𝑒 and ̇ 𝑒. 𝛼𝑃 , 𝛼𝐼
and 𝛼𝐷 values are outputs of the fuzzy system obtained with the rules
set forth in Tables 1 and 2 . The first table describe fuzzy rules for
learning the 𝛼𝑃 and 𝛼𝐼 values, These rules specify the conditions for
each output concerning the quality of input values, 𝑒 and ̇ 𝑒. Table 2
describe fuzzy rules for learning the 𝛼𝐷 value,The values of 𝛼𝑃 , 𝛼𝐼, and
𝛼𝐷 are obtained from the fuzzy system using the rules.
In Fig. 6-a, 𝛼𝑃 and 𝛼𝐼 which are the outputs of the fuzzy system,
are plotted as surface representation based on the input values, 𝑒 and,
̇ 𝑒. A surface representation of output 𝛼𝐷 in terms of inputs in the fuzzy
system is also plotted in Fig. 6 -b.
Fig. 5. Membership function for 𝛼𝑃 , 𝛼𝐼 and 𝛼𝐷.
Table 1
Fuzzy rules for learning the 𝛼𝑃 and 𝛼𝐼 values.
̇ 𝑒
PB PM PS ZO NS NM NB
B B B B B B B NB 𝑒
S B B B B B S NM
S S B B B S S NS
S S S B S S S ZO
S S B B B S S PS
S B B B B B S PM
B B B B B B B PM
Table 2
Fuzzy rules for learning the 𝛼𝐷 value, The values of 𝛼𝑃 , 𝛼𝐼, and 𝛼𝐷 are obtained from
the fuzzy system using the rules.
̇ 𝑒
PB PM PS ZO NS NM NB
S S S S S S S NB 𝑒
B S S S S S B NM
B B S S S B B NS
B B B S B B B ZO
B B S S S B B PS
B S S S S S B PM
S S S S S S S PM
3.2.2. Fractional calculus
Fractional calculus is a branch of mathematical analysis that studies
the possibility of taking real number power of the differential operator
and integration operator ( Tarasov, 2019 ). There are several defini-
tions of fractional derivatives. The definition for Caputo’s fractional
derivative of order 𝜆 of a function 𝑓 (𝑡) is given by:
𝑎𝐷𝛼
𝑡 𝑓 (𝑡) = 1
𝛤 (𝛼 − 𝑛) ∫
𝑡
𝛼
𝑓 (𝑛)(𝜏)
(𝑡 − 𝜏)𝛼−𝑛+1 𝑑𝜏, n − 1 < 𝛼 < 𝑛 (23)
The Grünwald–Letnikov and the Riemann–Liouville definitions of a
fractional derivative are as follows:
𝑎𝐷𝛼
𝑡 𝑓 (𝑡) = lim
ℎ⟶0
1
ℎ𝛼
[𝑡−𝑎
ℎ
]
∑
𝑘=0
(−1)𝑘
(𝛼
𝑘
)
𝑓 (𝑡 − 𝑘ℎ) (24)
𝑎𝐷𝛼
𝑡 𝑓 (𝑡) = 1
𝛤 (𝛼 − 𝑛)
𝑑𝑛
𝑑𝑡𝑛 ∫
𝑡
𝑎
𝑓 (𝜏)
(𝑡 − 𝜏)𝛼−𝑛+1 𝑑𝜏, n − 1 < 𝛼 < 𝑛 (25)
where ℎ refers to step time increment and Γ is Euler’s gamma func-
tion. 𝑎 and 𝑡 are the limits related to the operation of fractional
differentiation.
3.2.3. Discretization methods
There are two discretization methods consist of direct discretization
and indirect discretization. Several direct discretization methods by
Engineering Applications of Artiϧcial Intelligence 136 (2024) 108926 
5 

===== PAGE 6 =====
H. Shahbazi et al.
Fig. 6. Fuzzy inference system.
finite element and difference equation are proposed like short memory
principle and Lagrange function interpolation method.
With respect to Grunwald–Letnikov definition, by generating func-
tion 𝑠 = 𝜔(𝑧−1), it is possible to transform the fractional order dif-
ferentiator 𝑠𝛼 from 𝑠 domain to 𝑧 space by Euler and Tustin method.
For achieving the coefficient of approximation equation for fractional
calculus, Tustin operator as the generating function is considered as
follows:
𝑠𝛼 = (𝜔(𝑧−1))𝛼 =
(
2
𝑇 ⋅ 1 − 𝑧−1
1 + 𝑧−1
)𝛼
(26)
And perform the power series expansion of Eq. (26) The discretized
result is:
𝑍 {𝐷𝛼𝑥(𝑡)} = 𝐶𝐹 𝐸
{(
2
𝑇
1 − 𝑧−1
1 + 𝑧−1
)𝛼}
𝑋(𝑧) ≈
(2
𝑇
)𝛼 𝑃𝑝(𝑧−1)
𝑄𝑞(𝑧−1) 𝑋(𝑧) (27)
where 𝐶𝐹 𝐸(𝑥) is the continued fraction expansion of 𝑥; 𝑝 and 𝑞 are the
orders of the approximations; 𝑃 and 𝑄 are polynomials of degrees 𝑝
and 𝑞.
The fractional order controller can be approximated by discretiza-
tion methods as follows:
𝐺𝑐 (𝑧) = 𝑘𝑝 + 𝑘𝑖𝑤𝑖(𝑧) + 𝑘𝑑 𝑤𝑑 (𝑧) (28)
where 𝑤𝑖(𝑧) and 𝑤𝑑 (𝑧) are respectively the discrete approximation
equation of fractional order integral 𝑠−𝜆 and the discrete approximation
equation of 𝑠𝛿.
Fig. 7. PID controllers with fractional orders.
3.2.4. Fractional order controllers
In Fact, a PID controller is a type of feedback controller that is
widely used in control systems. PID controllers control systems by
generating control signals with respect to the error between measured
data and desired set point. The transfer function of the PID controller
is given by:
𝐺𝑐 (𝑠) = 𝐾𝑝 + 𝐾𝑖
1
𝑠 + 𝐾𝑑 𝑠 (29)
The proportional gain ( 𝐾𝑝) determines the reaction to the error
between measured data and desired set point, differential gain ( 𝐾𝑑)
determines the reaction to the rate of changing the error and integral
gain (𝐾𝑖) determines the reaction to the summation of errors.
To improve the performance of the PID controllers using a fractional
order controller are suggested which are involved by an integer of order
𝜆 and a differentiator of order 𝜇. The differential equation of fractional
order PI𝜆D𝜇 is described as:
𝑢(𝑡) = 𝐾𝑝𝑒(𝑡) + 𝐾𝑖𝐷−𝜆𝑒(𝑡) + 𝐾𝑑 𝐷𝜇𝑒(𝑡) (30)
The transfer function of FOPID obtained through Laplace transform
is given by:
𝐺𝑐 (𝑠) = 𝐾𝑝 + 𝑇𝑖𝑠−𝜆 + 𝑇𝑑 𝑠𝜇 (𝜆, 𝜇 > 0) (31)
As shown in Fig. 7, 𝜆 = 1 and 𝜇 = 1 indicates normal PID controller;
for 𝜆 = 0 and 𝜇 = 1 FOPID controller changes to the normal PD
controller; 𝜆 = 1 and 𝜇 = 0 indicates normal PI controller and 𝜆 = 0
and 𝜇 = 0 indicates a proportional gain.
From Eq. (30) to design a fractional order PID controller for roll,
pitch and yaw control the five parameters 𝐾𝑝, 𝐾𝑖, 𝐾𝑑 and 𝜆, 𝛿 are re-
quired to be designed for each attitude controller. Because the dynamic
of quadrotor is highly coupled, all the parameters must be designed
simultaneously according to control objectives. For the conventional
PID controller design, all the poles of the closed-loop transfer function
must be confined to the left half of the s plane. Based on the stability
condition of the fractional order system, a controller, which stabilizes
the integer order system could stabilize the fractional order system.
3.2.5. Optimization algorithms
Learning the parameters of the Fuzzy and fractional order PID
controller has been performed by two well-known stochastic optimiza-
tion algorithms, namely the GA and PSO algorithms. The process of
optimizing the controller parameters is shown in Fig. 8. In the following
subsections, a brief description of these two learning algorithms is
presented.
Genetic algorithm: Genetic algorithm is one of the optimization
stochastic algorithms which is inspired by natural evolution ( Sivanan-
dam et al. , 2008). The algorithm is used to minimize or maximize an
objective function. The genetic algorithm is initialized with the creation
of a random population of solution vectors. The genetic algorithm has
three main operators consist of reproduction, crossover, and mutation;
Engineering Applications of Artiϧcial Intelligence 136 (2024) 108926 
6 

===== PAGE 7 =====
H. Shahbazi et al.
Fig. 8. Block diagram of the optimization algorithm-based FOPID controller for quadrotor.
to achieve the best population of the solution, in each iteration, every
solution vectors are subjected to these three operators that results in a
better population of solution vectors in the next iteration.
Particle Swarm Optimization: Particle swarm optimization is a
stochastic optimization algorithm, inspired by social behavior of fish or
bird schooling (Wang et al., 2018). Different from GA algorithm there
is not any operators such as crossover, reproduction, and mutation in
the PSO algorithm. The PSO algorithm is initialized with the creation
of particles distributed randomly over the whole solution domain. The
particles move in each iteration with respect to the gbest (the best value
found so far) and the pbest (individual particle’s best position). The
fitness of particles for a particular position is evaluated by the objective
function.
By finding the two best values the velocity in each dimension in
the sequential iteration for each particle is updated by the following
equations:
𝑣𝑖(𝑡 + 1) = 𝑣𝑖(𝑡) + 𝑐1𝜑1(𝑝𝑖(𝑡) − 𝑥𝑖(𝑡)) + 𝑐2𝜑2(𝑝𝑔(𝑡) − 𝑥𝑖(𝑡)) (32)
𝑥𝑖(𝑡 + 1) = 𝑥𝑖(𝑡) + 𝑣𝑖(𝑡 + 1) (33)
where 𝑣𝑖 is the particle velocity, 𝑥𝑖 is the particle position. 𝑃𝑖 is
individual particle’s best position and 𝑃𝑔 is the best value found so far.
𝑐1 and 𝑐2 are two constant which implies cognitive learning and the
social learning rate respectively The values of the two constants stand
for the comparative importance of the learning of the particles from its
own best position ( 𝑝𝑖) and the global best position ( 𝑝𝑔).
Due to the lacks of velocity control mechanism in the original PSO
formula, it does not have a proper ability to search at a fine grain (Wang
et al., 2018).
𝑣𝑖𝑑 (𝑡 + 1) = 𝜔𝑣𝑖𝑑 (𝑡) + 𝑐1𝜑1(𝑝𝑖(𝑡) − 𝑥𝑖(𝑡)) + 𝑐2𝜑2(𝑝𝑔(𝑡) − 𝑥𝑖(𝑡)) (34)
𝑥𝑖(𝑡 + 1) = 𝑥𝑖(𝑡) + 𝑣𝑖(𝑡 + 1) (35)
3.2.6. Parameters learning using Taguchi method
Parameter learning has a significant effect on the performance of
meta-heuristic algorithms. In this research, Taguchi method is applied
to the determine the proper parameters. This method is developed by
Taguchi. In details, it categorizes the factors into two groups including
signal and noise factors and utilizes a fractional factorial experiment
instead of full factorial experiments. The method aims at minimizing
the effect of noise to specify the optimal level of the signal factors. To
this end, the signal to noise ratio (S/N) is applied that estimates the
amount of variation of the response.
This fuzzy method can enhance the FOPID controller by allowing it
to handle uncertainties and nonlinearities effectively. The fuzzy system
dynamically adjusts the control gain values based on error parameters
and their derivatives, leading to a more responsive and adaptive control
strategy.
In this study, the L9 design of the Taguchi is utilized and the
signal to noise ratio (S/N) is considered which estimates the amount
Table 3
Levels of parameters of PSO algorithm.
Parameter Level 1 Level 2 Level 3
Crossover percentage 0.60 0.70 0.80
Mutation percentage 0.10 0.15 0.20
Population size 50 70 90
Fig. 9. The proper values of the parameters determined by Minitab.
of variation of the response. Due to minimization nature of the cost
function of the controller response, ‘‘Smaller is better’’ type is desirable.
Moreover, to change the cost function values to non-scale data, the
relative percentage deviation (RPD) formulation is used as follows:
𝑅𝑃 𝐷 =
||𝐴𝑙𝑔𝑠𝑜𝑙 − 𝐵𝑒𝑠𝑡𝑠𝑜𝑙||
||𝐵𝑒𝑠𝑡𝑠𝑜𝑙||
× 100 (36)
where, 𝐴𝑙𝑔𝑠𝑜𝑙 is the objective function value obtained by the meta-
heuristic algorithms and 𝐵𝑒𝑠𝑡𝑠𝑜𝑙 is the optimal solution obtained for
each instance by the GAMS software.
The ability to explore is determined by the societal factor and
individual factor. The learning factor 𝐶1 and 𝐶2 and weight W are
three adjustable parameters in PSO. Base on the three parameters,
the considered levels of the parameters are listed in Table 3 . The
table presents three parameters of the Particle Swarm Optimization
(PSO) algorithm across three levels. The crossover percentage increases
from 60% at level 1 to 80% at level 3, indicating a higher chance
of combining solutions from the population. The mutation percentage
shows a growth from 10% to 20%, suggesting an increase in the
diversity of the population by altering solutions. Lastly, the population
size expands from 50 to 90, which could potentially enhance the search
for optimal solutions by using a larger group of candidate solutions.
These parameters are crucial for the algorithm’s performance.
Using Minitab Software 16.2, the proper values of the parameters
are determined. The highest value of the S/N ratio in Fig. 9 indicates
the higher performance level for each parameter.
3.2.7. Objective function
An appropriate objective function should be defined for designing
the Fuzzy and FOPID controller. The objective function could be de-
fined based on desired specifications, for instance, overshoot ( 𝑀𝑝),
Engineering Applications of Artiϧcial Intelligence 136 (2024) 108926 
7 

===== PAGE 8 =====
H. Shahbazi et al.
rise time ( 𝑡𝑟), steady-state error ( 𝑒𝑠𝑠) and settling time ( 𝑡𝑠) are some
significant items in the time domain which show the performance of a
controller.
There are several criterions of control quality to evaluate the per-
formance of controller, including integral of squared-error (ISE), in-
tegrated absolute error (IAE) and the integrated of time-weighted-
squared-error (ITSE) that are considered in the step input for control
design. The ISE, IAE and ITSE performance criteria formulas are given
by:
ISE = ∫
∞
0
𝑒2 (𝑡) 𝑑𝑡 (37)
IAE = ∫
∞
0
|𝑒 (𝑡) |𝑑𝑡 (38)
ITSE = ∫
∞
0
𝑡𝑒2 (𝑡) 𝑑𝑡 (39)
These three criteria formulas have some advantages and disadvan-
tages, for instance, the minimization using IAE and ISE criteria may
result in a response with relatively small overshoot but a long settling
time. On the other hand derivation processes of the ITSE formula
are complex and time-consuming. In the paper, another time domain
performance criterion is defined by:
𝐽𝑖 = 𝑒−𝛾 (𝑀𝑝𝑖 + 𝑒𝑠𝑠𝑖) + (1 − 𝑒−𝛾 )(𝑡𝑠𝑖 + 𝑡𝑟𝑖) (40)
𝐽 (𝑘) =
∑
𝐽𝑖 (41)
where 𝐾 is the parameter vector [𝐾𝑝𝜃, 𝐾𝑖𝜃, 𝐾𝑑𝜃 , 𝜇𝜃, 𝜆𝜃, 𝐾𝑝𝜑, 𝐾𝑖𝜑… ], and
𝛾 is the weighting factor. It is up to the user to set the 𝛾 properly to
achieve the desired specification. In this study, the value of 𝛽 is set
to 1.4 so the effect of each parameter is the same in the objective
function. It is worth mentioning that since the dynamic of quadrotor is
highly coupled so all the parameters are designed simultaneously and
the objective function is equal to the summation of the 𝐽𝑖 for the roll,
pitch and yaw response to the step input.
3.2.8. Learning in FOPID
A multitude of approaches have been explored for parameter learn-
ing in PID and FOPID controllers. The primary objective of this research
is to engineer optimal PID and FOPID controllers utilizing stochastic
algorithms. To this end, the Particle Swarm Optimization (PSO) and
Genetic Algorithm (GA) are implemented to determine the gain values
and parameters for both controllers. A ceiling of 300 iterations is set
for each algorithm, and the parameters for each are derived using the
Taguchi method. The efficacy of PSO and GA optimized PID and FOPID
controllers in managing the quadrotor’s attitude has been rigorously
evaluated and juxtaposed.
The quadrotor’s control system receives a step input to regulate
roll, pitch, and yaw. The corresponding responses are illustrated in
Figs. 10, 11, and 12 for roll, yaw, and pitch control, respectively. A
summary of the comparative outcomes for roll control is encapsulated
in Table 4. The PSO-FOPID and GA-FOPID controllers demonstrate
superior performance over their PID counterparts in both roll and
pitch control, with PSO-FOPID achieving enhanced control by further
minimizing the cost function. Conversely, in yaw control, the GA-FOPID
controller exhibits a more favorable performance than the PSO-FOPID
controller.
The Table 4 presents a comparison of optimized PID and FOPID
controllers for roll control of the quadrotor. The GA PID controller
parameters are 𝐾𝑃 = 0 .96, 𝐾𝐷 = 0 .14, 𝐾𝐼 = 0 .56, resulting in a
maximum overshoot ( 𝑀𝑃 ) of 18.12%, a rise time ( 𝑡𝑟) of 0.26 s, and
a settling time ( 𝑡𝑠) of 0.77 s, with no steady-state error ( 𝐸𝑠𝑠). The GA
FOPID controller, with 𝐾𝑃 = 0 .59, 𝐾𝐷 = 0 .91, 𝐾𝐼 = 0 .35, 𝜆 = 0 .56,
𝜇 = 0 .63, achieves a lower 𝑀𝑃 of 15.1%, a 𝑡𝑟 of 0.29 s, and a 𝑡𝑠 of
0.896 s. The PSO PID controller has parameters 𝐾𝑃 = 0.95, 𝐾𝐷 = 0.14,
𝐾𝐼 = 0.58, with a 𝑀𝑃 of 19.86%, a 𝑡𝑟 of 0.26 s, and a 𝑡𝑠 of 0.806 s. The
Table 4
Comparative results of optimized PID and FOPID controllers for roll control of the
quadrotor.
Controller 𝐾𝑃 𝐾𝐷 𝐾𝐼 𝜆 𝜇 𝑀 𝑃 (%) 𝑡𝑟 𝑡𝑠 𝐸𝑠𝑠
GA PID 0.96 0.14 0.56 1 1 18.12 0.26 0.77 0
GA FOPID 0.59 0.91 0.35 0.56 0.63 15.1 0.29 0.896 0
PSO PID 0.95 0.14 0.58 1 1 19.86 0.26 0.806 0
PSO FPOID 0.51 0.76 0.04 0.52 0.68 9.76 0.3 0.756 0
Table 5
Comparative results of optimized PID and FOPID controllers for yaw control of the
plant.
Controller 𝐾𝑃 𝐾𝐷 𝐾𝐼 𝜆 𝜇 𝑀 𝑃 (%) 𝑡𝑟 𝑡𝑠 𝐸𝑠𝑠
GA PID 0.85 0.19 0.80 1 1 22.38 0.36 1.093 0.0003
GA FOPID 0.58 0.92 0.48 0.41 0.91 22.76 0.31 0.95 0.0004
PSO PID 0.83 0.193 0.80 1 1 24.83 0.34 1.043 0.0002
PSO FPOID 0.28 0.74 0.11 0.35 0.78 12.77 0.35 0.92 0.001
Table 6
Comparative results of optimized PID and FOPID controllers for pitch control of the
plant.
Controller 𝐾𝑃 𝐾𝐷 𝐾𝐼 𝜆 𝜇 𝑀 𝑃 (%) 𝑡𝑟 𝑡𝑠 𝐸𝑠𝑠
GA PID 0.81 0.12 0.71 1 1 13.95 0.31 1.37 0
GA FOPID 0.92 0.90 0.09 0.60 0.63 6.31 0.3 0.698 0
PSO PID 0.80 0.12 0.72 1 1 14.65 0.31 1.3070 0
PSO FPOID 0.54 0.67 0.29 0.40 0.72 9.08 0.33 1.34 0
PSO FPOID controller, with 𝐾𝑃 = 0.51, 𝐾𝐷 = 0.76, 𝐾𝐼 = 0.04, 𝜆 = 0.52,
𝜇 = 0.68, shows a significantly lower 𝑀𝑃 of 9.76%, a 𝑡𝑟 of 0.3 s, and a
𝑡𝑠 of 0.756 s.
Similarly, the Table 5 compares the same controllers for yaw con-
trol. The GA PID controller parameters are 𝐾𝑃 = 0 .85, 𝐾𝐷 = 0 .19,
𝐾𝐼 = 0.80, with a 𝑀𝑃 of 22.38%, a 𝑡𝑟 of 0.36 s, and a 𝑡𝑠 of 1.093 s, with
an 𝐸𝑠𝑠 of 0.0003. The GA FOPID controller, with 𝐾𝑃 = 0.58, 𝐾𝐷 = 0.92,
𝐾𝐼 = 0 .48, 𝜆 = 0 .41, 𝜇 = 0 .91, has a slightly higher 𝑀𝑃 of 22.76%,
a reduced 𝑡𝑟 of 0.31 s, and a 𝑡𝑠 of 0.95 s, with an 𝐸𝑠𝑠 of 0.0004. The
PSO PID controller has parameters 𝐾𝑃 = 0 .83, 𝐾𝐷 = 0 .193, 𝐾𝐼 = 0 .80,
resulting in a 𝑀𝑃 of 24.83%, a 𝑡𝑟 of 0.34 s, and a 𝑡𝑠 of 1.043 s, with an
𝐸𝑠𝑠 of 0.0002. The PSO FPOID controller, with 𝐾𝑃 = 0 .28, 𝐾𝐷 = 0 .74,
𝐾𝐼 = 0 .11, 𝜆 = 0 .35, 𝜇 = 0 .78, achieves a lower 𝑀𝑃 of 12.77%, a 𝑡𝑟 of
0.35 s, and a 𝑡𝑠 of 0.92 s, with an 𝐸𝑠𝑠 of 0.001.
In both roll and yaw control, the FOPID controllers demonstrate
improved performance over the PID controllers, particularly in terms
of reducing overshoot and settling time.
The Table 6 presents a comparative analysis of optimized PID
and FOPID controllers for pitch control. The GA PID controller, with
parameters 𝐾𝑃 = 0.81, 𝐾𝐷 = 0.12, and 𝐾𝐼 = 0.71, achieves a maximum
overshoot ( 𝑀𝑃 ) of 13.95%, a rise time ( 𝑡𝑟) of 0.31 s, a settling time
(𝑡𝑠) of 1.37 s, and a steady-state error ( 𝐸𝑠𝑠) of 0. In comparison, the
GA FOPID controller shows improved performance with 𝐾𝑃 = 0 .92,
𝐾𝐷 = 0 .90, 𝐾𝐼 = 0 .09, 𝜆 = 0 .60, 𝜇 = 0 .63, a lower 𝑀𝑃 of 6.31%,
a comparable 𝑡𝑟 of 0.3 s, and a reduced 𝑡𝑠 of 0.698 s. Similarly, the
PSO PID controller parameters are 𝐾𝑃 = 0 .80, 𝐾𝐷 = 0 .12, 𝐾𝐼 = 0 .72,
resulting in a 𝑀𝑃 of 14.65%, a 𝑡𝑟 of 0.31 s, and a 𝑡𝑠 of 1.3070 s. The
PSO FPOID controller, with 𝐾𝑃 = 0.54, 𝐾𝐷 = 0.67, 𝐾𝐼 = 0.29, 𝜆 = 0.40,
𝜇 = 0 .72, shows a 𝑀𝑃 of 9.08%, a 𝑡𝑟 of 0.33 s, and a 𝑡𝑠 of 1.34 s. The
results indicate that the FOPID controllers, particularly the GA FOPID,
have a significant advantage in reducing overshoot and settling time,
demonstrating their effectiveness in pitch control.
3.3. Learning to plane a path
3.3.1. Proximal policy optimization
Now, one of the most advanced algorithms in deep reinforcement
learning is Proximal Policy Optimization (PPO). This developed algo-
rithm is capable of maintaining a proper balance between performance
Engineering Applications of Artiϧcial Intelligence 136 (2024) 108926 
8 

===== PAGE 9 =====
H. Shahbazi et al.
Fig. 10. Step response of roll control.
Fig. 11. Step response of yaw control.
Fig. 12. Step response of pitch control.
and understanding ( Schulman et al. , 2017). However, it is so simple
to use by a wide range of users that it cannot be used for every
reinforcement learning algorithm. Because this algorithm is used to
train policy-based models.
This algorithm tries to put policy changes in a range that, in
addition to improvement, is not too far from the previous policy.
With this approach, this algorithm succeeds in improving the policy
while maintaining training stability. One of the most famous methods
that also exists in this algorithm is the Actor–Critic method. In this
method, an actor model is responsible for making decisions about the
next action based on the current state, and the critic model evaluates
the performance value of the actions taken. This algorithm allows
the actor’s action to improve and at the same time use criticism for
evaluation, which will be discussed further.
In this project, PPO is used to train an agent that can follow speci-
fied paths while exposed to unknown disturbances. Also, the quadrotor
has been trained to perform acrobatic maneuvers. With a relatively
simple and intelligent design, it is acceptable to reward a quadrotor
with agile maneuvers. The structure of the method is shown in Fig. 13.
To produce a path for quadrotor, step-by-step actions must be taken,
which are as follows:
In this section, an attempt is made to move the quadrotor on a
reference path, and this path can be designed in such a way that the
quadrotor performs maneuvers. However, the conditions for perform-
ing the maneuver depend on the power, speed, and acceleration of the
quadrotor motors. Tracking the reference path while in the radius and
reach of unknown disturbances is one of the tasks of aerial maneuvers,
and it is assumed that the quadrotor has access to this path. The
reference path has properties and features, one of the most important
of which is to guarantee that this path and its dynamic maneuvers are
possible in reality no matter how difficult and challenging they may
Engineering Applications of Artiϧcial Intelligence 136 (2024) 108926 
9 

===== PAGE 10 =====
H. Shahbazi et al.
Fig. 13. Illustration of a quadrotor agent trained using PPO to follow specified paths and perform acrobatic maneuvers.
Fig. 14. Illustration of a neural network architecture for policy (actor) and value (critic) functions.
be. To perform aerial maneuvers, we must ensure that the reference
path is designed in such a way that, for example, in a circular path, the
tangential speed must be faster than the predetermined boundary so as
to prevent free fall at the top of the circular maneuver.
‖𝑣𝑙‖ > 𝜖
√
𝑟𝑔 (42)
where 𝑟 is the symbol for the radius of the circular path and 𝑔 is the
amount of gravity.
States and Actions : State 𝑠 defines the position, velocity, and accel-
eration errors of the quadrotor with respect to the reference path, as
well as the orientation and angular velocity vectors. In this error-based
state, instead of informing the quadrotor with a state that has current
position coordinates and target position coordinates, the desired actions
are made possible with less regard to the flow paths and specific targets.
The state is defined as follows:
𝑠 = [𝑒𝑝𝑜𝑠, 𝑒𝑣𝑒𝑙, 𝑒𝑎𝑐𝑐 , 𝑞, 𝜔]𝑇 (43)
where 𝑞 is a four-parameter vector that represents the quadrotor’s
orientation, and 𝜔 represents the angular velocity.
Actions are forces applied to the quadrotor by electric motors. To
converge faster to the path and perform real-world scenarios, actions
are limited between 0 and 15 N.
Network Creation: The policy (actor) and value (critic) functions are
created by a neural network that maps a state s and a goal g to a
distribution over actions 𝜋. In the actor network, which consists of 29
layers, inputs are processed by 4 hidden layers, each with 192, 256,
256, and 192 neurons, respectively. ReLU activation is used for all
hidden units. Then, in two branches of the neural network, each of
which is processed by 3 other hidden layers called 𝜇 and 𝜎, the action
distribution is processed as shown in Fig. 14 . This figure shows the
actor network. The critic network is shown in Fig. 15 .
Then, the action is sampled through Gaussian assumption. For the
main path, the 𝑡𝑎𝑛ℎ dual activation function is used to soften the
initial response of the network. This makes it possible to train faster by
giving a higher probability of selecting an action close to the desired
movement, which is its initial requirement for quadrotor stability. After
the quadrotor is stable, learning more complex tasks such as path
tracking and disturbance rejection becomes much easier. For the critic
network, which has 10 layers, 4 hidden layers similar to the common
path used in the actor network are used. Then, the output is activated
by a complex function for the final variance output.
Rewards: To find the path, there are four sentences that encourage
the quadrotor to follow the reference path while under the influence
of random force magnitudes and directions. The reward shapes the
behavior of the quadrotor to reduce position error, velocity error, accel-
eration error, and deviation error. Position, velocity, and acceleration
rewards, rpos, rvel, racc, encourage the agent to synchronize itself with
the position, velocity, and acceleration of the reference path.
The reward shaping for the quadrotor is defined as follows:
𝑟𝑝𝑜𝑠 = −𝑒
−
( 1
0.5 m ‖𝑒𝑝𝑜𝑠‖
)2
(44)
𝑟𝑣𝑒𝑙 = −𝑒
−
( 1
1 m∕s ‖𝑒𝑣𝑒𝑙‖
)2
(45)
𝑟𝑎𝑐𝑐 = −𝑒
−
(
1
1 m∕s 2 ‖𝑒𝑎𝑐𝑐 ‖
)2
(46)
To maintain yaw stability, the yaw reward 𝑟𝜓 is added to encourage
the quadrotor to keep 𝜓 always zero.
𝑟𝜓 = −𝑒
−
(1
5 ‖𝑒𝜓 ‖
)2
(47)
Finally, the total reward is written as a weighted sum of the above
rewards:
𝑟 = 0.6𝑟𝑝𝑜𝑠 + 0.1𝑟𝑣𝑒𝑙 + 0.1𝑟𝑎𝑐𝑐 + 0.2𝑟𝜓 (48)
As shown in Fig. 16 , reference paths are randomly designed while
taking into account the physical constraints of the quadrotor.
Early Termination (ET): To find a path and perform aerial maneuvers,
tasks can be modeled as an episodic operation (segmented). However,
during training, the episode ends after the agent reaches the goal or
certain conditions occur. For example, if the agent deviates too much
(e.g., 1 m) from the reference path, the episode ends and the episode
Engineering Applications of Artiϧcial Intelligence 136 (2024) 108926 
10 

===== PAGE 11 =====
H. Shahbazi et al.
Fig. 15. Illustration of a critic network with 10 layers, including 4 hidden layers following a similar architecture as the actor network.
Fig. 16. Illustration of randomly designed reference paths for a quadrotor, considering
its physical constraints.
is restarted. To find a path, when 𝜓 is greater than a certain value, the
end conditions are created differently.
For aerial maneuvers, the 𝑧-axis of the body, represented by 𝑧𝑏, is
tracked during training, and when the angle between𝑧𝑏 and the desired
acceleration vector deviates from a small value, the episode ends. These
early termination conditions ensure that the agent is only exposed to
relevant tasks and ultimately learns in an appropriate training space.
Also, if necessary, the 𝑥-axis of the body, represented by 𝑥𝑏, is tracked
and maintained along the reference path.
Aerial Maneuvers : To perform aerial maneuvers, it is important to
expose the agent to the relevant reaction and behavior to learn the
desired outcome. To do this, the reward design must be modified. That
is, in addition to the main reward, secondary rewards𝑟𝑥𝑏 and 𝑟𝑥𝑏 should
be used.
𝑟𝑥𝑏 = −𝑒− 1
30 ‖𝑒𝑥𝑏‖2
(49)
𝑟𝑧𝑏 = −𝑒− 1
30 ‖𝑒𝑧𝑏‖2
(50)
where 𝑒𝑥𝑏 and 𝑒𝑥𝑏 represent the angle between the desired speed and
the desired acceleration vector along the reference path, respectively.
This ensures that during training, when 𝑧𝑏 follows the direction of the
acceleration vector, it causes the agent to receive more reward, which
is eager to orient towards circular paths for aerial maneuvers. Also,
matching the directions of 𝑥𝑏 and the velocity vector ensures proper
heading of the quadrotor.
Fig. 17. Roll control and gain values changes per time.
Table 7
Comparison of attitude control using PID and Fuzzy PID controller.
ts PO (%) e ss tr Angle Controller
0.64 0 0 0.65 𝜑
0.54 0 0 0.55 𝜃 PID
0.48 15.21 0 0.23 𝜓
0.38 0 0 0.39 𝜑
0.37 0.83 0 0.40 𝜃 Fuzzy-PID
0.41 0.88 0 0.42 𝜓
4. Simulation results
4.1. Attitude control simulation
Using a fuzzy system to adjust the control gains, PID controller was
simulated in MATLAB software, in order to compare and assess the
performance of this controller with the classical PID controller. Fig. 17
shows the simulation result for attitude control of Roll direction, the
response of the fuzzy-PID controller and PID to the step input and
control gains’ changes over time are drawn in this figure. It can be
seen that the system response with fuzzy-PID control method is more
favorable than PID.
Fig. 18 shows the simulation result for the angular control of Pitch
and changes in control gains by the fuzzy controller.
Fig. 19 shows the simulation result of Yaw angle control in response
to the step input for PID and fuzzy PID controller, and as well as the
changes in control gains.
Table 7 compares the attitude control for PID and fuzzy PID con-
trollers in response to the step input. Step-response characteristics
includes settling time (𝑡𝑠), the maximum overshoot (PO), energy storage
systems (𝐸𝑠𝑠), and rise time ( 𝑡𝑟) are presented in this table.
Engineering Applications of Artiϧcial Intelligence 136 (2024) 108926 
11 

===== PAGE 12 =====
H. Shahbazi et al.
Fig. 18. Simulation outcomes for pitch angle management.
Fig. 19. Psi control and gain values changes per time.
The Table 7 compares the performance of PID and Fuzzy-PID con-
trollers in attitude control by evaluating key step-response metrics.
The PID controller shows no overshoot (%PO) and steady-state error
(𝑒𝑠𝑠) for all angles, with settling times ( 𝑡𝑠) of 0.64, 0.54, and 0.48 s
for angles 𝜑, 𝜃, and 𝜓 respectively. The rise times ( 𝑡𝑟) closely match
the settling times. In contrast, the Fuzzy-PID controller exhibits a
minimal overshoot for angles 𝜃 and 𝜓, with values of 0.83% and 0.88%
respectively, while maintaining a zero steady-state error. The settling
times are slightly reduced to 0.38, 0.37, and 0.41 s for the respective
angles, indicating a faster response. The rise times are again similar
to the settling times. Overall, the Fuzzy-PID controller demonstrates a
marginally faster response with negligible overshoot, suggesting a more
refined control compared to the traditional PID controller, especially
for the angles 𝜃 and 𝜓.
4.2. PPO simulations
Then, for reinforcement learning, the agent learns to track the path
while exposed to unknown disturbances. Disturbance is modeled as a
force that is randomly directed and has a random magnitude between
Fig. 20. Learning process and amount of rewards at each stage.
Fig. 21. Comparison of dual tanh activator with single tanh activator.
Table 8
Comparison of learning by adding neural layers.
Number of layers 87 79 71 63 51
Training time 120 min 120 min 120 min 120 min 120 min
Number of actor layers 61 55 49 43 35
Number of critic layers 26 24 22 20 16
Episode number 756 854 972 1108 1393
Episode reward 81 76 1682 268 426
Average reward 89 81 174 331 370
Episode Q0 57 44 72 84 87
0 and 1 Newtons on the quadrotor’s center of mass. Reinforcement
learning training is performed using the PPO method in 10,000 steps.
For this part, aerial maneuvers are plotted with their reference paths
and the amount of deviation error. This maneuver, called Split 𝑆,
accelerates the quadrotor at a distance of 10 meters and rolls 180
degrees. Then it enters a half-circle with a radius of 𝑟 = 4 m. Learning
on this path is done with 10,000 episodes, the process of which is
shown in Fig. 20.
To confirm the importance of the dual activation function 𝑡𝑎𝑛ℎ and
ET, Fig. 21 is presented. In this figure, it is clear that the quadrotor
with the dual activation function 𝑡𝑎𝑛ℎ and ET has the best performance
compared to other possible performances. Interestingly, the single 𝑡𝑎𝑛ℎ
activation function has a slight ability to stabilize the quadrotor and
does not easily learn any relevant reactions.
Also, adding multiple neural layers with 256 neurons between the
previous 196 neuron layers in both the operator and critic networks
results in changes in reward and learning time in 2000 episodes as
follows in 22:
In the following, all the desired information in these two hours will
be examined in the Table 8.
Engineering Applications of Artiϧcial Intelligence 136 (2024) 108926 
12 

===== PAGE 13 =====
H. Shahbazi et al.
Fig. 22. Actor and critic networks used, this figure illustrates the impact of integrating additional neural layers with 256 neurons.
The Table 8 provides a comparative analysis of neural network
performance with different layer configurations. The training time re-
mains constant at 120 min for all setups, indicating a standard training
period. As the total number of layers decreases from 87 to 51, there
is a trend towards simpler architectures. Actor layers are reduced from
61 to 35, and critic layers from 26 to 16, suggesting a proportional
decrease in complexity within the actor–critic model components. The
episode number increases from 756 to 1393, implying more iterations
are needed as the network is simplified. The episode reward varies,
but the average reward generally increases with fewer layers, reaching
a peak of 370 with 51 layers, indicating that a simpler model may
yield more consistent rewards. The initial Q-value of the episode,
Episode Q0, shows a slight increase from 57 to 87, suggesting improved
initial estimations by the Q-learning algorithm as the network becomes
less complex. In summary, reducing the number of layers does not
negatively impact training time and seems to lead to more consistent
rewards and better initial value estimations in this experiment. The
data also underscores the actor–critic model’s adaptability to varying
network complexities.
According to the results obtained in two hours, it is observed that a
neural network with more layers is slower to train but more accurate
and receives a higher reward. It is also possible that increasing the
number of neural network layers may increase the complexity of the
model and require more training data.
5. Experimental results
5.1. Test bench
To have a secure and reliable verification, an experimental test
stand is manufactured to evaluate the performance of the controller in
the quadrotor (Fig. 23).
The test stand allows the quadrotor to have roll and pitch motion up
to ±30 and to have yaw motion freely. A quadrotor is installed in the
stand and an IMU is used to obtain the acceleration and the velocity
information of the system. An arduino microcontroller is used as an
onboard controller to control rotors speed and a GY-80 sensor is used
for measuring the value of roll pitch and yaw. Fig. 24 shows the simple
system architecture of the quadrotor. The microcontroller reads analog
signals from accelerometers and gyroscopes. The signals should be
converted to the digital form to be processed by the microcontroller. To
measure the inclination of the quadrotor for pitch and roll, the digital
data will be combined. To prevent miscalculation which will affect the
Fig. 23. The quadrotor robot on the test stand.
stability in quadrotor flight a suitable filter is needed for reducing the
noise from sensor output to get a near-real value. The filtered data will
be used as feedback in the PID control system. Kalman Filter is used
to reduce the noise from the sensor. The microcontroller produces four
pulses with modulations (PWM) to control the brushless motor speed.
These pulses will be sent to the electronic speed. controllers (ESC)
which will control the brushless motors.
The Kalman Filter significantly contributes to the stability of the
quadrotor’s flight by processing sensor data. It does so by integrating
the outputs from the accelerometer, gyroscope, and compass sensors,
which are prone to noise due to system vibrations caused by the motion
of the rotors. The Kalman Filter effectively compensates for this noise,
ensuring that the data used to control the angular position of the
quadrotor is accurate and reliable. By providing a more precise estima-
tion of the system’s position, the Kalman Filter allows for better control
actions from the PID controller. This results in a more stable flight with
less settling time and reduced maximum overshoot in response to step
inputs, as compared to a classical PID controller. In essence, the Kalman
Filter is crucial for filtering out the noise and improving the quality of
sensor data, which is vital for maintaining the stability and control of
the quadrotor during flight.
Kalman Filter is used to reduce the noise from the sensor. The mi-
crocontroller produces four pulses with modulations (PWM) to control
the brushless motor speed. These pulses will be sent to the electronic
speed controllers (ESC) which will control the brushless motors. Table 9
lists the details of the quadrotor components.
Digital and analog sensors are two types of IMU which are used
in robotic industry. In the paper, the analog type is used to measure
the attitude position of the quadrotor. The analog sensor gives voltage
Engineering Applications of Artiϧcial Intelligence 136 (2024) 108926 
13 

===== PAGE 14 =====
H. Shahbazi et al.
Fig. 24. The experimental system block diagram.
Table 9
Quadrotor component details used in the testbench and real robot.
Component’s name Model Manufacturer Description
Motor MT3510 Emax Max thrust: 1780 G
Electric speed controllers Simon series Emax Continuous current: 12 A
Accelerometer ADXL345 – Chipset of GY-80 sensor
Gyroscope L3G4200D – Chipset of GY-80 Sensor
Propeller 10 × 4.5L – –
Fig. 25. Sensor and Kalman filter output in the case of off motors.
level to the microcontroller and the voltage will convert the value to the
digital value by ADC module. To estimate the attitude of the quadrotor,
Kalman filter is used to combine the output values of accelerometer
and gyroscope. As shown in Fig. 25 the accelerometer output and the
Kalman filter output are near to each other while motors are off and
the angle changes by movement of hand.
When the motors are on, noises will appear in the output of sensors,
Kalman filter is used to reduce the noises by combination of accelerom-
eter and gyroscope output. As shown in Fig. 26 Kalman filter could
remove the noises properly.
5.2. Fuzzy experimental results
In order to investigate the fuzzy-PID controller performance in
attitude control of quadrotor, this controller was implemented in the
experimental model with three degrees of freedom. Several experiments
were conducted to evaluate the performance and efficiency of this
type of controller. In the first test, the controller controls the system
Fig. 26. Efficacy of Kalman filter in noise reduction for sensor outputs.
Fig. 27. Performance analysis of fuzzy-PID controller in quadrotor attitude adjustment.
to change the angle of the Roll from 10 to −20 degree. As shown
in Fig. 27 , for this experiment, the attitude control has been done
appropriately. To illustrate Kalman filter function, the output without
filter is also shown in the figure.
Error values and error derivatives are considered as inputs of the
fuzzy system, and the control gains at any given time are set with
respect to these two parameters. In order to evaluate the output of the
Engineering Applications of Artiϧcial Intelligence 136 (2024) 108926 
14 

===== PAGE 15 =====
H. Shahbazi et al.
Fig. 28. Dynamic adjustment of control gains in fuzzy system for roll control.
Fig. 29. Rapid and precise pitch angle control via controller output.
Fig. 30. Variations of error and derived error in the pitch control with fuzzy-PID
controller.
fuzzy system during the first experiment, the trend of control gains’
changes in Roll control is shown in Fig. 28 .
In the second experiment to control the Pitch angle, an angle of
0 degrees is given as the desired angle input to the controller. The
result is shown in Fig. 29 , where the controller output leads to a fast
and accurate appropriate response from the initial angle to the desired
angle.
Fig. 31. Experimental results of yaw control using fuzzy PID controller.
Fig. 32. Variations of error and derived error in the yaw control with fuzzy-PID
controller.
Fig. 33. Variations of gain values in yaw control.
The error variations and the error derivative of attitude control in
Pitch direction is shown in Fig. 30 .
In the third experiment, the controller performance was evaluated
to change the Yaw angle from to 10 ◦ to the optimal angle of −20◦, as
shown in Fig. 31.
The trend of error variation and the error derivative in Yaw angle
controlling is shown in Fig. 32.
Fig. 33 shows the trend of changes of control gain values over time
unit Yaw attitude control.
The sequence of images for roll, pitch and yaw control using fuzzy
PID controller is shown in Fig. 34 .
Engineering Applications of Artiϧcial Intelligence 136 (2024) 108926 
15 

===== PAGE 16 =====
H. Shahbazi et al.
Fig. 34. The sequence of images for roll, pitch and yaw control using fuzzy PID.
Fig. 35. Assessing controller robustness against random perturbations.
Fig. 36. Demonstrating the FOPID controller’s attitude control in action.
Fig. 37. Pitch angle control experiment results using FOPID controller.
Fig. 38. Yaw angle control experiment results using FOPID controller.
Engineering Applications of Artiϧcial Intelligence 136 (2024) 108926 
16 

===== PAGE 17 =====
H. Shahbazi et al.
Fig. 39. Roll angle control with FOPID controller while subjecting to disturbance.
In order to evaluate the robustness of the designed controller,
several random perturbations have been entered into the system. As
shown in Fig. 35, the controller maintains the system’s stability at an
optimum speed.
5.3. FOPID results
In the experiment, FOPID controller is used to control the attitude of
the experimental model. Various experiments were performed to check
the performance and the effectiveness of FOPID controller. In exper-
iment 1, FOPID controller controls the roll angle while the quadrotor
starts at 10◦ and ends at the goal roll angle of −20◦. As the result of the
experiment is presented in Fig. 36, the quadrotor performs the desired
motion successfully.
The pitch angle during the experiment is shown in Fig. 37 while
quadrotor starts at 0 ◦ and ends at the desired angle of −22◦.
As shown in Fig. 38 FOPID controller controls the yaw angle from
−20◦ and to the goal of 10 ◦. Finally, to check the robustness of the
FOPID controller to the external disturbances, random disturbances are
applied to the quadrotor. As shown in Fig. 39 the controller stabilized
the quadrotor rapidly even with disturbance is applied.
The sequence of images in the experiments are shown in Fig. 40
5.4. Flight experiments
The final version of the layered controller is implemented on a
quadrotor drone similar to the test-bench. The main experiment is
autonomous loop path for the drone. In this task, the flying robot
should control the attitude and orientation while slowly increasing its
height and x-coordination in a loop. This job is complicated because
three different parameters should be simultaneously controlled by the
system. Fig. 41 demonstrates the final flying drone. The autopilot build
based on layered learning structure is installed on the drone. Some
snapshots of the autonomous loop experiment are presented in Fig. 41.
In the figure, the robot is first on the ground. In the last part of the
picture, the robot is successfully in the air in a loop path.
The challenges associated with controlling three different parame-
ters simultaneously in the autonomous loop path experiment include
managing the attitude, orientation, and incremental changes in
height and x-coordination . These parameters must be precisely con-
trolled to ensure the quadrotor’s stability and accurate navigation along
the loop path. The complexity lies in the need for real-time adjustments
and synchronization of these parameters to maintain a smooth and
stable flight trajectory.
The layered learning structure addresses these challenges by di-
viding the control system into layers, each responsible for different
aspects of the flight control. This modular approach allows for spe-
cialized processing and decision-making at each layer, which can then
be integrated to produce a cohesive control strategy. By doing so, the
layered learning structure enables the quadrotor to:
• Simultaneously Process Multiple Control Parameters : Each
layer can focus on a specific control parameter, allowing for
simultaneous adjustments without overwhelming a single control
system.
• Adapt to Dynamic Conditions : The layered approach provides
flexibility, enabling the system to quickly adapt to changes in one
parameter without disrupting the others.
Fig. 40. The sequence of images control on the test bench, captures the PID controller’s deft handling of the yaw angle.
Engineering Applications of Artiϧcial Intelligence 136 (2024) 108926 
17 

===== PAGE 18 =====
H. Shahbazi et al.
Fig. 41. Ascending to new heights: The autonomous loop path of a layered controller quadrotor.
• Enhance Decision-Making: With separate layers working in har-
mony, the system can make more informed decisions based on a
comprehensive understanding of the current state of the quadro-
tor.
• Improve Response Time : Layered learning can reduce the re-
sponse time by allowing parallel processing of control actions,
leading to a more agile and responsive flight.
Overall, the layered learning structure facilitates the management
of complex control tasks by distributing them across multiple layers,
each with its own specialized function, resulting in a more robust and
efficient control system for the quadrotor.
6. Conclusion
Findings: This research introduced a layered learning structure
for training a quadrotor, utilizing a PID controller enhanced by a
fuzzy system to dynamically adjust control gains. The controllers were
optimized using the PSO algorithm to achieve an optimal response.
Simulations conducted in MATLAB confirmed that the fuzzy PID con-
troller outperforms the classical PID controller by reducing settling time
and overshoot in response to step inputs. Additionally, the integration
of sensor outputs through a Kalman filter effectively mitigated system
noise, providing accurate position estimations for control purposes.
Research Limitations: The study’s limitations include the reliance
on simulations for initial evaluations, which may not fully capture
the complexities of real-world dynamics. The laboratory model, while
effective, may not replicate all the environmental variables that could
impact the quadrotor’s performance. Furthermore, the optimization
algorithms used, PSO and GA, have inherent limitations in terms of
convergence speed and the potential for getting trapped in local optima.
Recommendations for Future Research: Future research should
focus on real-world testing to validate the simulation results and further
refine the control system. Exploring additional optimization algorithms
could provide insights into achieving even more efficient control gain
tuning. The development of more advanced noise compensation tech-
niques would also be beneficial. Moreover, expanding the layered
learning structure to incorporate other intelligent control strategies
could enhance the quadrotor’s adaptability and performance in more
complex environments.
CRediT authorship contribution statement
Hamed Shahbazi: Writing – review & editing, Supervision, Soft-
ware, Methodology, Data curation, Conceptualization. Vahid Tikani:
Writing – original draft, Software, Resources, Methodology, Concep-
tualization. Roholamin Fatahi: Writing – original draft, Validation,
Software, Resources.
Declaration of competing interest
All authors have participated in (a) conception and design, or anal-
ysis and interpretation of the data; (b) drafting the article or revising
it critically for important intellectual content; and (c) approval of the
final version.
This manuscript has not been submitted to, nor is under review at,
another journal or other publishing venue.
The authors have no affiliation with any organization with a direct
or indirect financial interest in the subject matter discussed in the
manuscript
Data availability
The data that has been used is confidential.
Engineering Applications of Artiϧcial Intelligence 136 (2024) 108926 
18 

===== PAGE 19 =====
H. Shahbazi et al.
References
Abbasi, S., Khalili, H.A., Daneshmand-Mehr, M., Hajiaghaei-Keshteli, M., 2022. Per-
formance measurement of the sustainable supply chain during the COVID-19
pandemic: A real-life case study. Found. Comput. Decision Sci. 47 (4), 327–358.
Altug, E., Secchi, C., Fantuzzi, C., 2011. Quadrotor modeling and control using
Newton-Euler formulation. J. Intell. Robot. Syst. 61 (1–4), 209–228.
Asignacion, Jr., A., Satoshi, S., 2024. Historical and current landscapes of autonomous
quadrotor control: An early-career researchers’ guide. Drones 8 (3), 72.
Bora, J.P., Kumar, R., Singh, S., 2016. Hybrid fuzzy controller for quadrotor UAV. J.
Intell. Robot. Syst. 81 (1), 3–17.
Bouabdallah, S., 2007. Design and Control of Quadrotors with Application to
Autonomous Flying. Tech. rep., Epfl.
Çağlayan, N., Abbasi, S., Yilmaz, I., Erdebilli, B., et al., 2024. Bibliometric analysis on
the distributed decision, decentralized decision, and fuzzy logic. Discrete Dyn. Nat.
Soc..
Chandrasekar, A., Radhika, T., Zhu, Q., 2022. Further results on input-to-state stability
of stochastic Cohen–Grossberg BAM neural networks with probabilistic time-varying
delays. Neural Process. Lett. 1–23.
de Oliveira Evald, P.J.D., Aoki, V.M., da Silva, C.B., Cardoso, D.S., Pinheiro, P.M.,
da Costa Botelho, S.S., Junior, P.L.J.D., 2024. A review on quadrotor attitude
control strategies. Int. J. Intell. Robot. Appl. 1–21.
Dorcak, L., Petras, I., Kostial, I., Terpak, J., 2002. State-space controller design for the
fractional-order regulated system. arXiv preprint math/0204189.
Dunfield, K.A., Karaman, S., Tedrake, R., 2015. Neural network-based controller for
quadrotor UAVs. IEEE Trans. Robot. 31 (4), 866–880.
Gaing, Z.-L., 2004. A particle swarm optimization approach for optimum design of PID
controller in AVR system. IEEE Trans. Energy Convers. 19 (2), 384–391.
Gonzalez, E.D.S., Abbasi, S., Azhdarifard, M., 2023. Designing a reliable aggregate
production planning problem during the disaster period. Sustain. Oper. Comput.
4, 158–171.
Gu, Y., Cheng, S., Hovakimyan, N., 2024. Proto-MPC: An encoder-prototype-decoder
approach for quadrotor control in challenging winds. arXiv preprint arXiv:2401.
15508.
Idrissi, M., Salami, M., Annaz, F., 2022. A review of quadrotor unmanned aerial
vehicles: applications, architectural design and control algorithms. J. Intell. Robot.
Syst. 104 (2), 22.
Kennedy, J., Eberhart, R., 1995. Particle swarm optimization. In: Proceedings
of ICNN’95-International Conference on Neural Networks. Vol. 4, IEEE, pp.
1942–1948.
Lee, T., Leok, M., McClamroch, N.H., 2010. Sliding mode control of a quadrotor
helicopter. IEEE Trans. Control Syst. Technol. 18 (1), 16–23.
Li, G., Tunchez, A., Loianno, G., 2022. Learning model predictive control for quadrotors.
In: 2022 International Conference on Robotics and Automation. ICRA, IEEE, pp.
5872–5878.
Liu, X., Chen, X., Li, S., Li, J., 2019. Designing a control system for a completely
automatic dynamic system. J. Intell. Robot. Syst. 94 (1), 1–10.
Maaruf, M., Mahmoud, M.S., Ma’arif, A., 2022. A survey of control methods for
quadrotor uav. Int. J. Robot. Control Syst. 2 (4), 652–665.
Mirtaba, M., Jeddi, M., Nikoofard, A., Shirmohammadi, Z., 2023. Design and imple-
mentation of a low-complexity flight controller for a quadrotor UAV. Int. J. Dyn.
Control 11 (3), 689–700.
Ou, C., Lin, W., 2006. Comparison between PSO and GA for parameters optimization of
PID controller. In: 2006 International Conference on Mechatronics and Automation.
IEEE, pp. 2471–2475.
Peng, C., Tian, Y., Bai, Y., Gong, X., Zhao, C., Gao, Q., Xu, D., 2013. ADRC trajectory
tracking control based on PSO algorithm for a quad-rotor. In: 2013 IEEE 8th
Conference on Industrial Electronics and Applications. ICIEA, IEEE, pp. 800–805.
Petras, I., 2000. The fractional-order controllers: Methods for their synthesis and
application. arXiv preprint math/0004064.
Prescott, T.J., Redgrave, P., Gurney, K., 1999. Layered control architectures in robots
and vertebrates. Adapt. Behav. 7 (1), 99–127.
Radhika, T., Chandrasekar, A., Vijayakumar, V., Zhu, Q., 2023. Analysis of Markovian
jump stochastic Cohen–Grossberg BAM neural networks with time delays for
exponential input-to-state stability. Neural Process. Lett. 55 (8), 11055–11072.
Sabatino, F., 2015. Quadrotor control: modeling, nonlinearcontrol design, and
simulation.
Schulman, J., Wolski, F., Dhariwal, P., Radford, A., Klimov, O., 2017. Proximal policy
optimization algorithms. arXiv preprint arXiv:1707.06347.
Sivanandam, S., Deepa, S., Sivanandam, S., Deepa, S., 2008. Genetic algorithm
optimization problems. Introduction to Genetic Algorithms. Springer, pp. 165–209.
Stone, P., Veloso, M., 2000. Layered learning. In: European Conference on Machine
Learning. Springer, pp. 369–381.
Tarasov, V.E., 2019. On history of mathematical economics: Application of fractional
calculus. Mathematics 7 (6), 509.
Vinagre, B.M., Podlubny, I., Dorcak, L., Feliu, V., 2000. On fractional PID controllers:
a frequency domain approach. IFAC Proc. Vol. 33 (4), 51–56.
Wang, D., Tan, D., Liu, L., 2018. Particle swarm optimization algorithm: an overview.
Soft Comput. 22, 387–408.
Zhang, Z., Yang, H., Fei, Y., Sun, C., Yu, Y., 2023. Control of UAV quadrotor using
reinforcement learning and robust controller. IET Control Theory Appl. 17 (12),
1599–1610.
Engineering Applications of Artiϧcial Intelligence 136 (2024) 108926 
19 