

===== PAGE 1 =====
Engineering Applications of Artificial Intelligence 133 (2024) 108506
Available online 30 April 2024
0952-1976/© 2024 The Author(s). Published by Elsevier Ltd. This is an open access article under the CC BY-NC license ( http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-
nc/4.0/).
Contents lists available at ScienceDirect
Engineering Applications of Artificial Intelligence
journal homepage: www.elsevier.com/locate/engappai
Research Paper
Reinforcement learning based robot navigation using illegal actions for
autonomous docking of surface vehicles in unknown environments
Maria Inês Pereira ∗, Andry Maykol Pinto
FEUP - Faculty of Engineering of University of Porto, Rua Dr. Roberto Frias, 4200 - 465, Porto, Portugal
INESC TEC - Institute for Systems and Computer Engineering, Technology and Science, Rua Dr. Roberto Frias, 4200 - 465, Porto, Portugal
A R T I C L E I N F O
Keywords:
Reinforcement learning
Actor-critic
Autonomous docking
Autonomous surface vehicle
A B S T R A C T
Autonomous Surface Vehicles (ASVs) are bound to play a fundamental role in the maintenance of offshore wind
farms. Robust navigation for inspection vehicles should take into account the operation of docking within a
harbouring structure, which is a critical and still unexplored maneuver. This work proposes an end-to-end
docking approach for ASVs, based on Reinforcement Learning (RL), which teaches an agent to tackle collision-
free navigation towards a target pose that allows the berthing of the vessel. The developed research presents
a methodology that introduces the concept of illegal actions to facilitate the vessel’s exploration during the
learning process. This method improves the adopted Actor-Critic (AC) framework by accelerating the agent’s
optimization by approximately 38.02%. A set of comprehensive experiments demonstrate the accuracy and
robustness of the presented method in scenarios with simulated environmental constraints (Beaufort Scale and
Douglas Sea Scale), and a diversity of docking structures. Validation with two different real ASVs in both
controlled and real environments demonstrates the ability of this method to enable safe docking maneuvers
without prior knowledge of the scenario.
1. Introduction
Offshore wind energy has become increasingly relevant for sustain-
able development due to the strong and steady wind gusts provided
by maritime scenarios. Such harsh environments imply more frequent
Operations and Maintenance (O&M) routines to ensure proper function-
ing of the wind turbines and adjunct structures, which are constantly
subject to corrosion and fatigue. Inspection techniques can be enhanced
through the utilization of autonomous vehicles, thus making the super-
vision process safer and more efficient. Autonomous Surface Vehicles
(ASVs) are bound to be part of this paradigm shift towards automatized
procedures in maritime environments ( Pinto et al. , 2021 ), but the
technology behind them is currently lacking substantial development
to enable a full-scale application of autonomous decision making (Leite
et al. , 2018 ). From perception systems with the required robustness
for maritime scenarios ( Pinto and Matos, 2020; Campos et al. , 2021b;
Claro et al., 2020), to navigation techniques that ensure obstacle avoid-
ance (Campos et al. , 2019; Silva et al. , 2019), several challenges still
need to be solved.
Docking is one of the primary functions of any vessel, allowing
its recovery for charging and maintenance procedures, and one par-
ticularly lacking technological advancements in the automation sub-
ject (Bartels et al., 2022). This is intrinsically a critical maneuver, and
∗ Corresponding author at: FEUP - Faculty of Engineering of University of Porto, Rua Dr. Roberto Frias, 4200 - 465, Porto, Portugal.
E-mail address: maria.i.pereira@inesctec.pt (M.I. Pereira).
the complexity of seaports and harbours further adds to the propensity
for accidents ( Darbra and Casal , 2004 ). The scarcity of research in
this topic still holds back the transition from the scientific domain to
the technological one for autonomous docking. In these circumstances,
Reinforcement Learning (RL) appears as a mechanism to accomplish
autonomy in complex robotic problems (Garaffa et al., 2021). This Ma-
chine Learning approach aims to make an agent learn a task by interact-
ing with an environment, without receiving explicit examples ( Sutton
and Barto, 2017). The agent experiments different actions and, through
the maximization of the reward that it receives for each decision,
it attempts to learn an optimal policy ( 𝜋∗) that maps environment
states ( 𝑠𝑡) to actions ( 𝑎𝑡). This learning paradigm resembles the way
humans learn, i.e., by trial-and-error, and therefore it is more suitable
for decision-making problems such as the one at hand. RL also differs
from more traditional methods, such as fuzzy logic ( Valdez et al. ,
2020), in the sense that it does not require explicit modelling of every
possible state the agent might encounter ( Capra et al. , 2023 ). This
is a fundamental characteristic for dealing with unknown scenarios,
which is one of the objectives of this research. Additionally, RL is
more suitable for dealing with continuous data scenarios (Zhang et al.,
2023b), as is the case of autonomous vehicles navigation.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.engappai.2024.108506
Received 3 October 2023; Received in revised form 25 March 2024; Accepted 22 April 2024

===== PAGE 2 =====
Engineering Applications of Artificial Intelligence 133 (2024) 108506
2
M.I. Pereira and A.M. Pinto
This research provides an intelligent agent built on RL for surface
vehicles to dock autonomously in harbours of different configurations
and sizes, using only their onboard perception system to guide them
into unknown environments. The focus of this work lies in bridging
those perception abilities to autonomous navigation skills, that is, it
aims to enable the agent to learn and to make decisions directly
supported by the information collected from the vehicle’s perception
system. This intelligent agent handles decision-making processes for
motion planning that simultaneously contribute towards achieving a
desired docking pose and ensuring obstacle avoidance. Several chal-
lenges that impose significant limitations on the manoeuvrability and
perception capabilities of ASVs are addressed in this work, such as
performing the docking maneuver in unknown scenarios, in close range
to harbour structures, and constrained by phenomena like wind and
ocean waves. These constraints can be successfully tackled with an RL-
based method, given that it allows the agent to improve its capability
of adaptation to unseen and unmodelled conditions. The contributions
of this article include:
• An RL-based framework for autonomous docking of a surface
vehicle, which leverages the agent’s perception abilities for high-
level motion planning that enables reaching a target pose within a
docking structure while avoiding collision. Unlike other methods
which are given intermediate poses obtained from pre-made maps
of the scenario, the RL agent developed in this work operates
without previous knowledge of the environment and relies only
on the final target pose and on the vehicle’s onboard perception
system;
• A new concept entitled illegal actions used during the agent’s
training process to increase the coherence of actions to be selected
at each iteration step by disabling opposite actions over a time
period, and thus optimize the exploration. This methodology also
helps to consolidate the potential of Actor-Critic frameworks;
• Extensive experiments using both simulated and real scenarios,
as well as two different ASVs, that validate the system’s docking
capabilities with a success rate of 96.4% and evaluate its robust-
ness to different degrees of environmental constraints and various
docking structure configurations, thus proving the method’s re-
silience to unknown conditions. Moreover, the concept of illegal
actions accelerates the training process by 38.02%.
The remainder of this article is structured as follows. Section 2
portrays the current state of the art on RL-based robotic applications,
in particular regarding maritime scenarios and docking for ASVs. Sec-
tion 3 begins with a brief description of fundamental RL concepts
for understanding this work, followed by the characterization of the
environment representation, action space and reward function, along
with other methodologies that add to this paper’s contributions. The
results of the proposed method are then presented and discussed in
Section 4. Finally, Section 5 summarizes the main conclusions of this
work.
Notations: Lower case boldface letters represent vectors, whereas up-
per case boldface letters denote matrices. 𝐸[𝑎] denotes the expectation
of 𝑎, and ̂𝑏 represents the estimate value of variable 𝑏.
2. Related work
The earliest methods that combine RL with robotics are related
to general navigation tasks, such as obstacle avoidance or adhering
to a predefined trajectory (Cebollada et al., 2021). These first efforts
often considered simplified state representations or assumed known
positions and velocities for surrounding objects (Duguleana and Mogan,
2016). In the meantime, RL-based research in robotics has undergone
considerable progress, contributing to the development of new and
more sophisticated methods (de Bruin et al., 2018; Pfeiffer et al., 2018).
Nonetheless, these advances have not been sufficient for safe deploy-
ment of navigation techniques fully based on RL, as many approaches
still rely on combining this Machine Learning variant with traditional
path planning methods (Chang et al., 2021).
This lack of adequate research is especially valid for slow-changing
industries, such as the maritime sector, which has only recently seen an
expansion of studies built on RL. One of the first proposed methods in
this subject was the work of Anderlini et al. (2019), who developed
an RL algorithm to control the docking process of an Autonomous
Underwater Vehicle (AUV) onto a charging station. The performance
of this method was compared with that of established optimal control
strategies in a simulated environment, having outperformed parametric
optimal control but underperformed when compared to a PID-based
approach. Also in the underwater domain, Cao et al. (2019) ventured
into unknown scenarios with the task of target search. Although more
daring, this work made use of a combination of RL with traditional
exploration methods and relied on a simplified grid map to represent
the search environment. A few other AUV-based approaches have been
developed more recently, in particular towards path planning tasks, but
performance assessment was limited to simulated scenarios (Chu et al.,
2023; Hadi et al., 2024).
RL studies regarding surface vehicles suffer from similar limita-
tions. The majority of these methods focus on ensuring trajectory
tracking of an ASV, such as the work of Zhang et al. (2020), which
means they are based on the existence of a predefined path. Zhang
combined conventional model-based control with Deep RL, where the
first component provided closed-loop stability, whereas the RL module
counteracted the modelling uncertainties. Despite the innovation, this
method was only tested in simulated environments without considering
any environmental disturbances. By contrast, Woo and Kim (2020)
validated their work for collision avoidance of an ASV in real-world
scenarios. The authors adopted a quite high-level approach for the
vehicle’s behaviour such as ‘‘ path following, starboard avoidance, and
port avoidance instead of instant low-level action such as steering control
command’’ (Woo and Kim, 2020). This method achieved comparable
performance to traditional methods, but a number of limitations were
acknowledged by the authors, such as long training duration (hundreds
of hours) caused by a high-dimensional state representation. The main
drawback of this work, however, was the accuracy loss observed in
the real-world deployment of the algorithm. Simulation-only training
with disregard for environmental constraints was the likely cause for
the reduction of the method’s reliability.
In 2020, Meyer et al. (2020b) proposed a method to handle both
path following and collision avoidance using Deep RL. This work
adopted a continuous action space and a set of 225 rangefinders to
assess the collision risk surrounding the vehicle, considering only static
obstacles. The framework included a trade-off parameter used for the
computation of the total reward, that gave more or less importance to
either the path following or the collision avoidance task, and which was
fine tuned by the authors. Despite having achieved a success rate close
to 100%, this approach was only tested in simulated scenarios and did
not consider wind, waves or other external disturbances to the vessel.
Also in 2020, Meyer et al. (2020a) improved on this first approach
by considering moving obstacles and complying with the International
Regulations for Preventing Collisions at Sea (COLREGs). In spite of not
considering maritime constraints, this work was validated in scenar-
ios simulated more realistically, using a digital reconstruction of the
Trondheim Fjord in Norway. The work of Lin et al. (2023) considers
the effect of current flows, despite resorting to simulated constraints.
Other methods demonstrate further limitations in deploying an
RL agent for maritime tasks, such as considering only tests in open
sea (Chun et al., 2021), or relying on conventional control meth-
ods (Zhang et al., 2022). Wang et al. (2021a,b) produce more sophisti-
cated approaches towards tracking control that are capable of dealing
with vehicles of unknown dynamics and in realistically simulated en-
vironments. Lambert et al. (2021) provide an interesting insight on
dealing with the challenge of gathering data from maritime scenarios.
To achieve collision avoidance for an ASV, they first trained an RL

===== PAGE 3 =====
Engineering Applications of Artificial Intelligence 133 (2024) 108506
3
M.I. Pereira and A.M. Pinto
algorithm on a simulated ground environment and then conducted
a domain transfer process to marine scenarios with minimal further
training. This strategy was made possible by adopting high-level actions
and by ‘‘ leveraging existing path planning and proven low-level control
methodologies that are utilized in multiple domains ’’ (Lambert et al., 2021).
Real-world tests in both ground and maritime environments proved
the potential of the proposed methodology but also demonstrated
the need for further research so that the method can be generalized
to more complex settings, with dynamic obstacles, for example. The
methodologies described thus far require at least partial knowledge
of the environment, given that most rely on a path constructed from
way-points known a priori . Amendola et al. (2020) took a step further
from such assumptions by considering a path divided into segments
and taking into account environmental conditions for proposing an
Asynchronous Deep RL method for controlling a ship’s movement. In
this approach, each path segment corresponded to an episode, which
meant that, in fact, this strategy approximates this problem to the
trajectory tracking task. Some of the described methodologies focus on
using RL to replace optimal control processes (Zhang et al., 2022; Wang
et al., 2023a), namely non-linear control (Rigatos et al., 2017; Roman
et al., 2022), whereas others, such as the work proposed, employ it
to achieve high-level decision making (Wang et al., 2023c; Xia et al.,
2023; Zhao et al., 2022).
A successful docking maneuver of an ASV needs to handle all of
the limitations described above, along with further challenges such
as navigation in close range to infra-structures and other vehicles,
and the requirement of holding the desired pose within the docking
structure. The level of difficulty of this task accounts for the lack of
research in making this an unmanned procedure. Nonetheless, a few
recent works demonstrate that a shift towards autonomous docking
is currently in motion, with advanced perception systems being de-
veloped to assist in this task (Kim et al., 2020; Pereira et al., 2021b;
Volden et al., 2022, 2023). Some conventional approaches towards
automatic docking have been proposed, but they either disregard real-
world constraints such as wind and waves (Li et al., 2020), or are built
on optimization-based trajectory planners and thus rely on previously
mapped environments (Martinsen et al., 2020; Wang et al., 2023b; Cai
et al., 2023). Nearly all of these approaches lack successful real-world
deployment (Liu et al., 2024; Zhang et al., 2023a; Leite et al., 2019).
RL-based approaches in this topic are very scarce, which demon-
strates that Artificial Intelligence (AI) is still in a very early stage
concerning critical tasks in the maritime environment. Existing works
consider simplified formulations of the problem in 2D simulated sce-
narios (Holen et al., 2022; Bjering Strand, 2020). Recently, Higo et al.
(2023) applied a trajectory-tracking methodology based on RL to
achieve automatic berthing from an initial waypoint-based path com-
puted on a previously mapped harbour. Another work that stands out is
that of Rørvik (2020), who developed an automatic docking procedure
for ASVs built on RL that achieved good performance and produced
efficient trajectories. The author also considered a simplistic conceptu-
alization of the problem, which consisted of the vessel approaching the
shore and holding a desired pose, without any other obstacles besides
the shore. Moreover, the algorithm was trained and validated in a
simulated environment, considering ocean currents of fixed amplitude
and direction, but no wind nor waves. Nonetheless, Rørvik’s work is a
great contribution for the integration of AI in the maritime sector and it
inspired other authors to study the potential of RL for solving this kind
of problems. Both Løver et al. (2021) and Gjærum et al. (2021) picked
up Rørvik’s RL algorithm for automatic docking and developed methods
to interpret the behaviour of the trained agent, through explainable AI,
for example, which demonstrated that RL does not have to be a ‘‘black-
box’’ approach as it is often claimed to be and that it can indeed be
used for critical operations such as docking maneuvers.
3. Deep reinforcement learning for autonomous docking
This section presents a brief description of some fundamental RL
concepts that provide the groundwork for this research. The developed
methodology is explained in detail, from the state representation and
the action space to the reward function. The section closes with a dis-
cussion on how to balance exploration and exploitation, which results
in the introduction and characterization of the illegal actions concept.
3.1. RL fundamentals
RL frameworks are usually categorized into policy-based or value-
based (Hameed et al., 2021). Models in the first category try to directly
optimize the policy, whereas models in the second one attempt to
evaluate the expected future return, i.e., learn a value function, and
extrapolate the policy from it. Actor-Critic methods combine both of
these approaches (Grondman et al., 2012) and have shown promising
results (Alexandru Zamfirache et al., 2023). In this type of framework,
the Actor represents the policy being optimized, which means it re-
ceives the current state of the environment and outputs an action to
be taken. On the other hand, the Critic represents the value function
that is being learnt. Simply put, it provides feedback on the actions
taken by the Actor by evaluating the goodness of the current state. The
Actor then updates its policy according to the critic’s feedback. Both
the Critic and Actor functions are parameterized with neural networks.
This work makes use of a variant of Actor-Critic methods called
Advantage Actor-Critic (A2C) (Mnih et al., 2016). Advantage represents
the appropriateness of a certain action in a certain state. In other words,
it shows how much better it is to take a specific action compared to the
average, in a given state. Eq. (1) shows that the Advantage value (𝐴) is
derived from the state–action value function ( 𝑄) using the state value
function (𝑉 ) as baseline:
𝐴(𝑠𝑡, 𝑎𝑡) = 𝑄(𝑠𝑡, 𝑎𝑡) − 𝑉 (𝑠𝑡). (1)
In order not to rely on a third neural network to estimate the 𝑄-
value function, and thus compromise efficiency, the previous equation
can be rewritten by using the relationship between the 𝑄 and the 𝑉
values from the Bellman optimality Eq. (2). Eq. (3) is thus obtained,
depending only on the Value function ( 𝑉 ) given by the Critic, on the
rewards (𝑟) and on the discount factor ( 𝛾), that varies between 0 and
1:
𝑄(𝑠𝑡, 𝑎𝑡) = E[𝑟𝑡+1 + 𝛾 ⋅ 𝑉 (𝑠𝑡+1)], (2)
𝐴(𝑠𝑡, 𝑎𝑡) = 𝑟𝑡+1 + 𝛾 ⋅ 𝑉 (𝑠𝑡+1) − 𝑉 (𝑠𝑡). (3)
The Advantage value is leveraged to update the Actor’s network,
and there are a number of strategies to do such. Proximal Policy
Optimization (PPO) (Schulman et al., 2017) is one of the most efficient.
It represents an improvement on Trust Region Policy Optimization
(TRPO) (Schulman et al., 2015), which was first developed as a method
to prevent destructively large policy updates. The general optimization
objective of policy gradient methods can be considered as depicted in
Eq. (4):
𝐿𝑃 𝐺(𝜃) = ̂E𝑡[𝑙𝑜𝑔(𝜋𝜃(𝑎𝑡|𝑠𝑡)) ̂𝐴(𝑠𝑡, 𝑎𝑡)], (4)
where 𝐿𝑃 𝐺 is the policy gradient loss, 𝑙𝑜𝑔(𝜋𝜃(𝑎𝑡|𝑠𝑡)) are the logarithmic
probabilities from the output of the policy network, and ̂𝐴(𝑠𝑡, 𝑎𝑡) is
the estimated Advantage value. These are highly dependent on the
knowledge gathered by the agent in the environment. Due to the
stochastic component of the agent’s exploration, there can be a large
deviation between historical experience and the current policy, which
leads to model instability. To restrain this effect, TRPO introduces the
probability ratio between the current policy and the previous one,
𝑟𝑡(𝜃) = 𝜋𝜃 (𝑎𝑡|𝑠𝑡)
𝜋𝜃𝑜𝑙𝑑 (𝑎𝑡|𝑠𝑡) :
𝐿𝐶𝑃 𝐼 (𝜃) = ̂E𝑡
[
𝜋𝜃(𝑎𝑡|𝑠𝑡)
𝜋𝜃𝑜𝑙𝑑 (𝑎𝑡|𝑠𝑡)
̂𝐴(𝑠𝑡, 𝑎𝑡)
]
, (5)

===== PAGE 4 =====
Engineering Applications of Artificial Intelligence 133 (2024) 108506
4
M.I. Pereira and A.M. Pinto
as well as a hard constraint to prevent the gradient step from moving
the current policy too far away from the original policy, thus defining a
‘‘trust region’’ represented by a threshold 𝛿, known as the trust radius:
̂E𝑡[𝐾𝐿[𝜋𝜃𝑜𝑙𝑑 (⋅|𝑠𝑡), 𝜋𝜃(⋅|𝑠𝑡)]] ≤ 𝛿, (6)
where 𝐾𝐿 represents the Kullback–Leibler divergence, which can be
solved approximately using conjugate gradient. In an attempt to reap
the benefits of TRPO’s approach while keeping a first-order optimiza-
tion problem, PPO discarded the constraint and presented a clipped
objective that penalizes any update that moves the probability ratio
too far from 1, by clipping it within an interval [1 − 𝜖, 1 + 𝜖], where 𝜖 is
the clipping factor. The gradient loss is then obtained by computing the
expectation over the minimum between the clipped and the unclipped
objective as depicted in Eq. (7):
𝐿𝑐𝑙𝑖𝑝 (𝜃) = ̂E𝑡[𝑚𝑖𝑛(𝑟𝑡(𝜃) ̂𝐴𝑡, 𝑐𝑙𝑖𝑝(𝑟𝑡(𝜃), 1 + 𝜖, 1 − 𝜖) ̂𝐴𝑡)]. (7)
PPO includes an additional entropy term (𝑐1) within the expectation
computation to ensure sufficient exploration by the agent.
Given the efficiency of the described algorithms, this work adopted
an A2C architecture using PPO to update the Actor’s network. The
Critic’s value function is optimized simply by using the discounted sum
of rewards as target to compute a loss based on the mean squared error.
The following sections contextualize this approach within the challenge
of autonomous docking, in particular by describing the design of the
reward function and by proposing changes to the aforementioned opti-
mization process to speed up convergence in problems with large and
disparate action spaces.
3.2. State and action spaces for ASV docking
The scope of autonomous docking in this research extends to com-
mercial harbours, which are highly complex environments that may not
be known a priori . To achieve a thorough representation of this kind
of scenario for a successful RL framework, the state space combined
navigation and perception-based features: S = [𝒇 𝒏𝒂𝒗, 𝒇 𝒑𝒓𝒄 ]. The former
set of features represent the position, orientation and velocity of the
ASV relative to its target pose (Fig. 1), which are given by sensors such
as GPS/RTK and IMU, whereas the perception-based features comprise
measurements obtained by visual or range sensors, such as a 3D LiDAR,
to detect nearby objects and avoid collision. Both sets of observations
are described in the present section.
This framework is targeted at differential vessels, with two pro-
pellers that allow surge and yaw movement, which represents the
majority of maritime vehicles. As such, the target pose is characterized
by three parameters: the 𝑥 and 𝑦 coordinates, and the yaw angle
(𝜓). Consequently, the first three elements of the state space are the
Cartesian distance between the origin of the vessel and this target
position in the 𝑥 and 𝑦 axes, and the difference between its heading
and the desired one. Additionally, the roll (𝜙) and pitch (𝜃) angles were
taken into consideration to detect safety-compromising events such as
the boat turning over. Finally, the navigation-based features include the
vessel’s linear and angular velocities ( 𝑣𝑙𝑖𝑛 and 𝑣𝑎𝑛𝑔), that correspond
to the surge velocity and the yaw rate, respectively. These two state
elements should be close to zero in the proximity of the target pose so
that the docking episode can be successfully terminated. In addition,
they allow for speed management when the boat is navigating in close
range to structures. The navigation features vector is then given by:
𝒇 𝒏𝒂𝒗 = [𝑥, 𝑦, 𝜓, 𝜙, 𝜃, 𝑣𝑙𝑖𝑛, 𝑣𝑎𝑛𝑔]. (8)
The presented navigation features are sufficient for the ASV to reach
a target pose within an obstacle-free scenario. However, the docking
process is carried out within a harbour where there are multiple vessels
and various structures such as docks, among other types of objects.
Therefore, the RL agent should be able to navigate through this environ-
ment without colliding with these entities. Collision avoidance cannot
be achieved without an accurate 3D perception of a 360° horizontal
Field-of-View (FoV) around the vessel, which can be obtained from
sensors onboard the vehicle that produce point clouds representative of
the scenario. The scene reconstruction provided by those point clouds
can be leveraged to achieve high-level situational awareness (Leite and
Pinto, 2024), which in turn is fundamental for avoiding obstacles. In
this work, such awareness is modelled by assessing the collision risk
around the vessel.
Firstly, a laser scan containing 360 distance measurements that fully
cover the scenario surrounding the vessel is obtained from each point
cloud. This step transforms a very unstructured data representation
into a comprehensible image suitable for analysing the collision risk,
as depicted in Fig. 2. Each ray represents the distance from the origin
of the vessel to the surface of the nearest obstacle in the corresponding
direction and at the specified height range.
This is a more lightweight representation than a point cloud, but
it still corresponds to an overly large state space and, as such, its
direct processing by the Actor’s and Critic’s networks would likely lead
to convergence difficulties, given the ‘‘ curse of dimensionality ’’ (Sutton
and Barto, 2017). To reduce complexity and, thus, not compromise
efficiency, it is necessary to downsample this information by grouping
the 360 measurements into a few sectors and then computing an
average collision distance representative of each sector. Considering
the vessel’s degrees of freedom, 8 main sectors were deemed sufficient
for a thorough coverage of the collision risk, as illustrated in Fig. 2,
each with a range of 𝜋
4 rad. The collision distance of each sector is
given by the average of the 20% lowest distances of the corresponding
sector. Then, a collision risk parameter that varies between 0 and 1 is
computed according to Eq. (9):
𝑟𝑖𝑠𝑘𝑐𝑜𝑙𝑙𝑖𝑠𝑖𝑜𝑛 𝛽 = 2 −𝑘𝑠(𝑂𝑏𝑠𝑡𝐷𝑖𝑠𝑡𝛽 −𝑇 𝑜𝑙), 𝛽 ∈ {0, … , 7} , (9)
where 𝑂𝑏𝑠𝑡𝐷𝑖𝑠𝑡𝛽 is the collision distance of sector 𝛽, 𝑇 𝑜𝑙 is a tolerance
value for the collision detection to be triggered slightly before the ac-
tual collision happens, thus giving the risk analysis a more conservative
dimension, and 𝑘𝑠 is a scaling factor. The perception-based feature
vector is then given by concatenating the 8 risk parameters:
𝒇 𝒑𝒓𝒄 = [𝑟𝑖𝑠𝑘𝑐𝑜𝑙𝑙𝑖𝑠𝑖𝑜𝑛 𝛽 ], 𝛽 ∈ {0, … , 7} . (10)
Fig. 3 illustrates two examples of the collision risk analysis. The left
column of the figure presents a model of an ASV positioned in two
different stages of the docking process. The right column depicts the
point cloud obtained by the LiDAR onboard the vehicle and a set of
green arrows that represent the collision risk level in the 8 main sectors.
The length of each arrow varies directly with the collision risk and
inversely with the distance to the nearest obstacle. An arrow of length
zero corresponds to the inexistence of obstacles in that direction. This
method for the analysis of the collision risk can be easily replicated
using other types of sensors such as rangefinders, radars and depth
cameras. In addition, it works for any number of obstacles, of any size
and shape, while maintaining a constant state space dimension.
The ASV’s motion can be discretized into a set of actions repre-
senting translational and/or rotational movement. These actions were
selected to address high-level behaviour such as ‘‘moving forward’’ or
‘‘rotating left’’. By not setting propeller velocity commands as direct
outputs, but linear and angular velocities, this work can be easily
adapted to vehicles with different propeller configurations. Both for-
ward and backward motion are allowed so as not to limit the ves-
sel’s manoeuvrability. Actions combining translation and rotation are
included to smooth the variation of the propellers’ velocities. The intro-
duction of two velocity levels (fast and slow) for some actions enables
the vessel to manage its speed throughout the different stages of the
docking process. A complete list of the action space1 and corresponding
linear and angular velocities is presented in Table 1.
1 https://youtu.be/1BqNzelp6qI

===== PAGE 5 =====
Engineering Applications of Artificial Intelligence 133 (2024) 108506
5
M.I. Pereira and A.M. Pinto
Fig. 1. Target pose within the docking structure that the ASV has to reach in order to terminate an episode with success.
Fig. 2. The 360 distance measurements are grouped into 8 sectors centred on the angles from −𝜋 to 3𝜋
4 rad with a step of 𝜋
4 rad.
3.3. Reward function
The maximization of the reward is the ultimate objective of the
agent for it to successfully learn the required task. This research pro-
poses a reward function based both on sparse and dense components.
The attribution of a binary reward at the end of each episode, based on
the successful completion of the task or not, would be insufficient and
would likely prevent the agent from learning enough information to
achieve its objective. An efficient solution is reward shaping (Hu et al.,
2020), which consists of reshaping the original final reward into smaller
continuous rewards that give feedback on intermediate actions. The
random exploration employed in the PPO’s training procedure further
increases the need for continuous assessment. As such, the proposed
reward is divided into two elements as presented in Eq. ( 11):
𝑟𝑡𝑜𝑡𝑎𝑙(𝑡) = 𝑟𝑠𝑝𝑎𝑟𝑠𝑒(𝑡) + 𝑟𝑑𝑒𝑛𝑠𝑒 (𝑡). (11)
The sparse component of the proposed reward function is built on
specific events that lead to the termination of an episode. These events,
which are listed below, may represent either a positive ( ⊕), negative
(⊖) or neutral ( ⊙) outcome:
⊕ 𝑡𝑎𝑟𝑔𝑒𝑡 - the vessel reaches the target pose;
⊖ 𝑐𝑜𝑙𝑙𝑖𝑠𝑖𝑜𝑛 - the vessel collides with one or more obstacles;
⊖ 𝑡𝑢𝑟𝑛 _𝑜𝑣𝑒𝑟 - the vessel turns over;
⊖ 𝑏𝑜𝑢𝑛𝑑𝑎𝑟𝑦 - the vessel overcomes a distance boundary defined to
prevent exploration too far from the docking structure;
⊙ 𝑡𝑖𝑚𝑒 _𝑜𝑣𝑒𝑟 - the episode reaches its maximum allowed duration.
Both the positive and negative events are considered for computing
the sparse reward component, as demonstrated in Eq. ( 12), where
𝜆𝑖(t) are binary variables that take value 1 if the corresponding event
happened and 0 otherwise, and 𝑟𝑖 are the rewards associated to those

===== PAGE 6 =====
Engineering Applications of Artificial Intelligence 133 (2024) 108506
6
M.I. Pereira and A.M. Pinto
Fig. 3. Example of the collision risk analysis in two different stages of the docking process. The images on the left column depict the two stages in simulation. The images on
the right column display the corresponding point clouds and a set of green arrows representing the collision risk in the 8 main directions. Arrow length varies directly with the
risk. An angle without arrow corresponds to zero risk.
Table 1
Action space: linear and angular velocities per action.
# Action Linear velocity
(m s−1)
Angular velocity
(rad s−1)
0 ∅ Do nothing 0 0
1 ↑ Move forward slowly 𝑘 ⋅ 𝑣𝑙𝑖𝑛 0
2 ⇑ Move forward fast 𝑣𝑙𝑖𝑛 0
3 ↶ Move forward while turning left 𝑣𝑙𝑖𝑛
2
𝑣𝑎𝑛𝑔
2
4 ↷ Move forward while turning right 𝑣𝑙𝑖𝑛
2 −
𝑣𝑎𝑛𝑔
2
5 ↺ Rotate left 0 𝑣𝑎𝑛𝑔
6 ↻ Rotate right 0 −𝑣𝑎𝑛𝑔
7 ↓ Move backward slowly −𝑘 ⋅ 𝑣𝑙𝑖𝑛 0
8 ⇓ Move backward fast −𝑣𝑙𝑖𝑛 0
9
↷
Move backward while turning left − 𝑣𝑙𝑖𝑛
2 −
𝑣𝑎𝑛𝑔
2
10 ↶ Move backward while turning right − 𝑣𝑙𝑖𝑛
2
𝑣𝑎𝑛𝑔
2
𝑣𝑙𝑖𝑛 and 𝑣𝑎𝑛𝑔 are the maximum allowed linear and angular velocities and k is a
regulating velocity factor ( 𝑘 = 0.3 in this case).
events. The neutral event, 𝑡𝑖𝑚𝑒_𝑜𝑣𝑒𝑟, does not affect the reward received
by the agent, but it simply limits the duration of each episode.
𝑟𝑠𝑝𝑎𝑟𝑠𝑒(𝑡) =
∑
𝑖
𝜆𝑖(𝑡)𝑟𝑖, 𝑖 ∈ {𝑡𝑎𝑟𝑔𝑒𝑡, 𝑐𝑜𝑙𝑙𝑖𝑠𝑖𝑜𝑛, 𝑡𝑢𝑟𝑛_𝑜𝑣𝑒𝑟, 𝑏𝑜𝑢𝑛𝑑𝑎𝑟𝑦}, (12)
In this work, 𝑟𝑡𝑎𝑟𝑔𝑒𝑡 = 5, 𝑟𝑐𝑜𝑙𝑙𝑖𝑠𝑖𝑜𝑛 = 𝑟𝑡𝑢𝑟𝑛_𝑜𝑣𝑒𝑟 = −10, and 𝑟𝑏𝑜𝑢𝑛𝑑𝑎𝑟𝑦 = −5.
The criteria that determine whether 𝜆𝑖(t) is 1 or 0 for each event are
depicted in Eq. (13) to (16).
Parameter 𝜆𝑡𝑎𝑟𝑔𝑒𝑡 takes value 1 if the agent is considered to have
achieved its target, i.e., if its distance to the docking position, its head-
ing difference and its linear and angular velocities are all under specific
thresholds represented by 𝜖, as depicted in Eq. ( 13). The variable 𝑑𝑖𝑠𝑡
is given by the Euclidean distance to the target: 𝑑𝑖𝑠𝑡(𝑥, 𝑦) where 𝑥 and 𝑦
are the first two elements of the state space, i.e., the distance between
the current and target positions in the 𝑥 and 𝑦 coordinates, respecti-
vely.
𝜆𝑡𝑎𝑟𝑔𝑒𝑡 = (𝑑𝑖𝑠𝑡 < 𝜖 𝑑𝑖𝑠𝑡 ) ∧ (𝜓 < 𝜖 𝜓 ) ∧ (𝑣𝑙𝑖𝑛 < 𝜖 𝑣𝑙𝑖𝑛 ) ∧ (𝑣𝑎𝑛𝑔 < 𝜖 𝑣𝑎𝑛𝑔 ). (13)
Parameter 𝜆𝑐𝑜𝑙𝑙𝑖𝑠𝑖𝑜𝑛 is set to 1 if the collision event is detected, which
happens whenever the collision risk is greater than or equal to 1 for any
of the considered directions (Eq. ( 14)):
𝜆𝑐𝑜𝑙𝑙𝑖𝑠𝑖𝑜𝑛 = ¬(𝑟𝑖𝑠𝑘𝑐𝑜𝑙𝑙𝑖𝑠𝑖𝑜𝑛 𝛽 < 1), ∀𝛽 ∈ {0, … , 7} . (14)
Parameter 𝜆𝑡𝑢𝑟𝑛_𝑜𝑣𝑒𝑟 represents the event of the vessel turning over
which is detected by the pitch or roll angles taking values greater than
a threshold (Eq. (15)):
𝜆𝑡𝑢𝑟𝑛_𝑜𝑣𝑒𝑟 = (𝜙 > 𝜖 𝜙) ∨ (𝜃 > 𝜖 𝜃). (15)
Finally, 𝜆𝑏𝑜𝑢𝑛𝑑𝑎𝑟𝑦 is equal to 1 if the vehicle’s distance to the target
is greater than the boundary’s radius, 𝐵, (Eq. (16)):
𝜆𝑏𝑜𝑢𝑛𝑑 = (𝑑𝑖𝑠𝑡 > 𝐵 ). (16)
The dense reward component is based on state parameters that
are continuously assessed during the episode. As shown in Eq. ( 17),
there are four elements to these continuous rewards: based on the
distance between the vessel and the target (𝑑𝑖𝑠𝑡), its orientation (𝑜𝑟𝑖𝑒𝑛),
velocity (𝑣𝑒𝑙) and collision risk ( 𝑟𝑖𝑠𝑘), each one varying within [−1; 0].
These reward components are described throughout this section and
illustrated in Fig. 4.
𝑟𝑑𝑒𝑛𝑠𝑒 (𝑡) = 𝑟𝑑𝑖𝑠𝑡 (𝑡) + 𝑟𝑜𝑟𝑖𝑒𝑛(𝑡) + 𝑟𝑣𝑒𝑙(𝑡) + 𝑟𝑟𝑖𝑠𝑘(𝑡). (17)
The first reward element is related to 𝑑𝑖𝑠𝑡. Naturally, the agent’s
objective is to minimize this variable and therefore 𝑟𝑑𝑖𝑠𝑡 (𝑡) should
increase as the distance decreases. Fig. 4(a) illustrates this relation-
ship. This reward’s curve assumes an exponential form when 𝑑𝑖𝑠𝑡 is
lower than 10 m and a linear one otherwise, as depicted in the figure.
This differentiation is important to heighten the sensitivity to distance
variations when the ASV is near the target.
The second element is based on the yaw of the vessel relative to the
docking target referential. This reward component ( 𝑟𝑜𝑟𝑖𝑒𝑛(𝑡)) is divided
into two stages that are dependent on 𝑑𝑖𝑠𝑡, and which are proposed

===== PAGE 7 =====
Engineering Applications of Artificial Intelligence 133 (2024) 108506
7
M.I. Pereira and A.M. Pinto
Fig. 4. Dense reward components according to: distance to target (a), orientation error when the distance is less (b) and more (c) than 5 m, linear (d) and angular (e) velocity,
and collision risk (f). In this case, 𝑘1 = 4, 𝑘2 = 𝑘4 = 0 .75, 𝑘3 = 0 .2, 𝑘5 = 10, 𝑚1 = −0 .0096, 𝑚2 = −0 .127, 𝑚3 = −1 .2, 𝑚4 = −0 .267, 𝑚5 = −12, 𝑚6 = −2 .67, 𝑏1 = −0 .5218, 𝑏2 = −0 .601,
𝑏4 = −0.467.
to help the agent direct itself towards the docking structure initially
and only seek the desired heading in the final stage. If the agent is
less than 5 m away from the target, the orientation reward measures
how close the vessel’s yaw is to the target one ( 𝑒𝑟𝑟𝑜𝑟𝑜𝑟𝑖𝑒𝑛). This error is
normalized in the interval [−𝜋; 𝜋[. Fig. 4(b) presents the reward for this
case, considering a maximum rotation error of 𝜋 rad, and an evolution
for 𝑟𝑜𝑟𝑖𝑒𝑛(𝑡) similar to that of 𝑟𝑑𝑖𝑠𝑡 (𝑡), i.e., by combining an exponential
component for lower orientation errors and a linear one for higher
errors. If the agent is more than 5 m away from the target position, then
the orientation error ( 𝑒𝑟𝑟𝑜𝑟𝑜𝑟𝑖𝑒𝑛) is computed relative to an angle that
ensures the front of the vessel is directed to that target point, also going
through normalization in the interval[−𝜋; 𝜋[. This way, the agent learns
to prioritize the minimization of the distance at this stage. As depicted
in Fig. 4(c), this reward varies linearly with 𝑒𝑟𝑟𝑜𝑟𝑜𝑟𝑖𝑒𝑛.
In the proposed reward function, the velocity-based component
(𝑟𝑣𝑒𝑙(𝑡)) is only considered during the final docking stage, which begins
when the agent is less than 5 m away from the docking position. This
constraint was introduced because the purpose of this reward is to help
the agent learn to slow down when close to the docking structure and
to fully stop when it reaches the target. Figs. 4(d) and 4(e) illustrate
the evolution of the linear ( 𝑟𝑙𝑖𝑛_𝑣𝑒𝑙(𝑡)) and angular ( 𝑟𝑎𝑛𝑔_𝑣𝑒𝑙(𝑡)) velocity
rewards, respectively. These are composed of two stages according
to the velocity values: the first stage is steeper than the second one,
similarly to previously mentioned rewards. However, in this case, the
first stage is also a linear function instead of an exponential one to
soften the deceleration. Both 𝑟𝑙𝑖𝑛_𝑣𝑒𝑙(𝑡) and 𝑟𝑎𝑛𝑔_𝑣𝑒𝑙(𝑡) vary from −0.5 to
0 and their sum corresponds to 𝑟𝑣𝑒𝑙(𝑡), that varies between −1 and 0.
The final reward component is related to the collision risk. As
previously described, the state space includes 8 measures of the col-
lision risk, each corresponding to a specific direction. The exponential
function expressed in Fig. 4(f) , that relates the collision risk level to
its reward, is applied to each of the 8 measures. However, only the
minimum value from these 8 rewards is included in the computation of
the dense rewards, shown above in Eq. (17). This function’s parameters
were tuned according to several experiments that aimed to ensure the
reward varied sharply enough so that the agent had time to react
when drawing near an obstacle but also so that this reward component
did not overcompensate the others when approaching the docking
structure. Unlike other works ( Meyer et al. , 2020b ,a), this approach
does not give increased importance to the collision risk in front of the
vessel because (i) backward movement is considered as well, and (ii)
currents and waves are taken into account, which means collisions can
happen sideways, especially when entering narrow structures such as
docks.
Considering the numerical examples presented throughout this sec-
tion, 𝑟𝑡𝑜𝑡𝑎𝑙(𝑡) may vary between −29 and 5. Nonetheless, these values
are merely illustrative and can be easily adjusted for vehicles with
different kinematic properties. To prevent unbalanced distributions of
network weights (Dann and Thangarajah, 2021), the total reward value
is down-scaled by a factor of 10.
3.4. Exploration vs. exploitation
At any given time-step during the training stage, the selection of
the next action to take is based on a trade-off between exploration
and exploitation, in an attempt to maximize the rewards. Exploita-
tion is considered a greedy approach because it exploits the gathered
knowledge to revisit positive rewards previously obtained. Exploration,
on the other hand, attempts to expand that partial knowledge by

===== PAGE 8 =====
Engineering Applications of Artificial Intelligence 133 (2024) 108506
8
M.I. Pereira and A.M. Pinto
searching unknown state–action pairs and, thus, potentially receive
larger rewards. PPO ensures this trade-off by sampling actions from
the latest version of the agent’s network, which is used as a stochastic
policy. This is achieved by using the network’s output probabilities to
set a categorical distribution and then sampling an action from such
distribution. This strategy causes the policy to be very random at first,
thus prioritizing exploration, and to become progressively less random
throughout the training phase as its knowledge gets broader and it leans
to exploiting rewards already received.
Given the diversity of the action space considered in this work,
exploration early in the training process may be hindered. A very
random action selection process, as that of the first stages of training,
implies that contrary actions, such as forward and backward movement
or as left and right rotation, will have very similar probabilities of
being sampled at any given state. This behaviour is undesired because it
cancels the effect of actions that are followed by their contrary ones and
it likely prevents the vessel from leaving its place, which blocks proper
exploration and, thus, hinders the agent’s learning process. To facilitate
exploration, this work establishes the concept of illegal action (IA),
which determines that the agent should not take the opposite action of
which it has just taken. As such, at each time-step, the proposed method
disables the selection of a set of actions that are considered to be
opposite of the most recently taken action. To achieve this deactivation,
the current policy is modified as presented below:
𝜋𝜃(𝑎𝑡|𝑠𝑡)′ = 𝜋𝜃(𝑎𝑡|𝑠𝑡) ⋅ (1 − 𝜖𝑖𝑙𝑙𝑒𝑔𝑎𝑙 ), (18)
where 𝜖𝑖𝑙𝑙𝑒𝑔𝑎𝑙 is a parameter that takes value 0 for allowed actions
and a value close to 1 for actions which are illegal at the moment.
It is not exactly equal to 1 to avoid division by zero. This opera-
tion greatly reduces the probability of an illegal action being selected.
This update is conducted for both the current ( 𝜋𝜃(𝑎𝑡|𝑠𝑡)) and previous
(𝜋𝜃𝑜𝑙𝑑 (𝑎𝑡|𝑠𝑡)) policies when determining the probability ratio 𝑟𝑡(𝜃). The
set of 𝜖𝑖𝑙𝑙𝑒𝑔𝑎𝑙 parameters for all the actions composes a mask𝑴, which is
employed when producing output probabilities for the actions through
𝑴 ⋅ 𝜋𝜃(𝑎𝑡|𝑠𝑡).
This deactivation of actions is enforced during a temporal window
that is larger for action-pairs with higher opposition. For example, the
action ‘‘moving forward’’ is completely contrary to ‘‘moving backward’’,
whereas ‘‘moving forward while turning left’’ only partially counters
that movement. The level of action opposition can be obtained by
𝑂𝑝(𝑎𝑡−1, 𝑎𝑡), where 𝑎𝑡−1 corresponds to the action that has most recently
been taken and 𝑎𝑡 represents an action that can potentially be selected
in the current time-step. The mapping between opposition levels and
each action pair, 𝑂𝑝(𝑎𝑡−1, 𝑎𝑡), is given by the look-up table depicted in
Table 2, where two different levels are defined: 𝑏1 and 𝑏2. Level 𝑏2 cor-
responds to a higher opposition degree, whereas𝑏1 is assigned to action
pairs of only partial opposition. Rotation-only actions are included in
the latter group because they are essential for pose adjustment in this
type of maneuver. The temporal window during which 𝜖𝑖𝑙𝑙𝑒𝑔𝑎𝑙 is not
null, i.e., an action is considered illegal, is determined as below:
𝑡 =
{
[𝑇 , 𝑇 + 𝑘𝑏1 ] if 𝑂𝑝(𝑎𝑡−1, 𝑎𝑡) = 𝑏1,
[𝑇 , 𝑇 + 𝑘𝑏2 ] if 𝑂𝑝(𝑎𝑡−1, 𝑎𝑡) = 𝑏2,
(19)
where 𝑇 is the current time, and 𝑘𝑏𝑖 is the number of time-steps that
correspond to the blocking temporal window of each level 𝑏𝑖. Given
that 𝑏2 is a level of higher opposition, it was specified that 𝑘𝑏1 =
𝑘𝑏2
2 .
This strategy of setting illegal actions reduces the randomness of
the exploration by avoiding the selection of actions that do not con-
tribute to the progression of the trajectory. During the training stage,
committing the agent to its previous choices potentially helps the
learning process because it teaches the agent about intermediate actions
that lead to termination events and, thus, how to prevent them at
an earlier stage. Once having learnt how to navigate and reach the
target, restricting the agent’s actions is no longer necessary. As such,
this method is not applied during the testing stage, giving the agent
total freedom of movement.
Table 2
Opposition level of each action pair.
# ∅ ↑ ⇑ ↶
↷ ↺ ↻ ↓ ⇓
↷
↶
∅ – – – – – – – – – – –
↑ – – – – – – – 𝑏2 𝑏2 𝑏1 𝑏1
⇑ – – – – – – – 𝑏2 𝑏2 𝑏1 𝑏1↶ – – – – – – – 𝑏1 𝑏1 𝑏2 𝑏1↷ – – – – – – – 𝑏1 𝑏1 𝑏1 𝑏2
↺ – – – – – – 𝑏1 – – – –
↻ – – – – – 𝑏1 – – – – –
↓ – 𝑏2 𝑏2 𝑏1 𝑏1 – – – – – –
⇓ – 𝑏2 𝑏2 𝑏1 𝑏1 – – – – – –↷
– 𝑏1 𝑏1 𝑏2 𝑏1 – – – – – –
↶ – 𝑏1 𝑏1 𝑏1 𝑏2 – – – – – –
To discourage exploration far from the docking structure, the
boundary mentioned in Section 3.3 was made dynamic. To recall its
purpose, when the vessel overcomes this imaginary border the episode
is terminated. By shrinking this boundary progressively throughout the
episode, the training time will decrease because the algorithm will
not accumulate large amounts of data from interactions within distant
areas, which do not add as much to the agent’s learning process. This
dynamic behaviour of the boundary is illustrated in Fig. 5, where 𝐵𝑡
represents the boundary at time-step 𝑡 and 𝑃𝑡 is the agent’s position at
that same instant.
4. Results and discussion
This section aims to evaluate the performance of the developed
docking framework considering three testing scenarios: (i) a simulated
environment in Gazebo using an emulated model of an ASV; (ii) a
realistic controlled scenario with a prototype of a surface vehicle; (iii)
a real harbour using a real ASV of higher Technology Readiness Level
(TRL).
Scenario (i) features a simulated model of the SENSE ASV (Campos
et al., 2021a), developed by INESC TEC. This is a differential surface
vehicle of dimensions 1.5 × 1 .1 × 1 .5 m (Length × Width × Height)
and maximum velocity of 1.5 m s−1, equipped with a 3D LiDAR (Ouster
OS1-128), a GPS/RTK module and an IMU. This first scenario aims
to provide a detailed analysis of the improvement given by the illegal
actions concept, as well as the robustness of the algorithm considering
different combinations of environmental constraints, such as wind and
waves, and also by generalizing the scenario to other types of docking
structures found in commercial harbours. The experiments of scenario
(ii) took place in the water tank of the Civil Engineering Department
of the Faculty of Engineering of the University of Porto, Portugal,
using the real SENSE ASV to evaluate the performance of the proposed
method with hardware in the loop while addressing near real-world
conditions. Scenario (iii) was set in the ATLANTIS Test Centre (Pinto
et al., 2021) in Viana do Castelo, Portugal, featuring a more robust
craft, named Nautilus (Campos et al., 2024), which is a monohull
vessel of dimensions 3.0 × 1 .4 × 1 .5 m (Length × Width × Height)
and maximum velocity of 3 m s−1, equipped with a similar perception
system to that of the SENSE ASV. This last set of experiments aim
to validate the presented methodology in a complex scenario under
harsher environmental conditions such as the ones presented by real
ports.
Section 4.1 depicts the implementation details of the concepts pro-
posed in this paper, while Sections Section 4.2, 4.3, and 4.4 present the
results of testing scenarios (i), (ii), and (iii), respectively.
4.1. Implementation details
Regarding the A2C framework, both the actor’s and critic’s networks
are composed of three fully connected layers each with 128 neurons,
using the Leaky ReLU activation function. The critic’s network has

===== PAGE 9 =====
Engineering Applications of Artificial Intelligence 133 (2024) 108506
9
M.I. Pereira and A.M. Pinto
Fig. 5. Shrinking boundary that prevents the agent from moving too far from the docking structure. An imaginary border is drawn centred on the target position and its radius
is progressively decreased. 𝐵𝑡 represents the boundary at time-step 𝑡 and 𝑃𝑡 is the agent’s position at that same instant. The episode is terminated whenever the agent’s position
is outside the boundary.
Table 3
Parameters used in the PPO’s training algorithm.
Parameter Value
Time-step duration ( 𝑇 ) 200 ms
Maximum time-steps per episode ( 𝑁𝑇 ) 400
Maximum linear velocity ( 𝑣𝑙𝑖𝑛) 1.0 m s−1
Maximum angular velocity ( 𝑣𝑎𝑛𝑔) 0.4 rad s−1
Replay buffer size ( 𝑁𝑟) 10 episodes
Nr. epochs per update ( 𝑁𝑒) 4
Actor learning rate ( 𝜂𝑎) 5 × 10−4
Critic learning rate ( 𝜂𝑐) 1 × 10−3
Discount factor ( 𝛾) 0.99
Clipping range ( 𝜖) 0.2
Entropy coefficient ( 𝑐1) 0.01
one output neuron, which corresponds to the state value. The policy
network has a final layer with dimension equal to that of the action
space, i.e, 11 in this case, which is then fed to a softmax layer to obtain
probabilities for the actions.
Table 3 presents the parameter values used in training. An action
given by the policy network is enforced on the vessel for the duration
of a time-step ( 𝑇 ), which in this implementation is 200 ms, given the
low velocity of the SENSE ASV. An episode may last a maximum of
400 time-steps ( 𝑁𝑇 ), that correspond to 80 s, because the docking
process is a maneuver that is quite circumscribed in time. During the
training stage, the value and policy networks are updated every 10
episodes (𝑁𝑟). The rest of the table depicts the hyperparameters used
in the PPO’s training procedure. The critic’s learning rate (1e −3) is
greater than the actor’s (5e −4) because the critic’s feedback helps the
agent’s learning process, and therefore the optimization of the critic’s
network should be quicker. Table 4 presents the parameters of the
episodes’ termination criteria, presented in Eqs. ( 13) to ( 16). These
parameters were kept for all the testing setups presented above, except
for the maximum velocity values ( 𝑣𝑙𝑖𝑛 and 𝑣𝑎𝑛𝑔), which were reduced
during the controlled-scenario experiments to 0.5 m s−1 and 0.2 rad s−1,
respectively, for safety purposes. As a consequence, the number of
maximum time-steps per episode ( 𝑁𝑇 ) was increased to 800.
Table 4
Parameters of episode termination criteria.
Parameter Value
Distance threshold ( 𝜖𝑑𝑖𝑠𝑡) 1.0 m
Heading threshold ( 𝜖𝜃) 0.2 rad
Linear velocity threshold ( 𝜖𝑣𝑙𝑖𝑛
) 0.1 m s−1
Angular velocity threshold ( 𝜖𝑣𝑎𝑛𝑔
) 0.02 rad s−1
Pitch threshold ( 𝜖𝜓) 0.5 rad
Roll threshold ( 𝜖𝜙) 0.5 rad
Given the complexity of solving the docking task in unknown sce-
narios, the training framework was divided into two stages: approach
and berthing (Nguyen, 2019). The first is the phase in which the vessel
moves within the harbour up to a point close to the docking structure,
whereas during the second it moves to the desired position within the
structure to be later secured to the quay. Using a bottom-up strategy,
the training algorithm begins with the second stage: berthing; which
means the vessel begins each episode at a maximum distance of 5 m
from the target position, and with a heading in the range [ − 𝜋
4 ; 𝜋
4 ] rad
from the desired one. Throughout the training process, the range of the
agent’s initial pose is progressively expanded until it fully includes the
approach stage (maximum distance of 16 m and heading range of [− 3𝜋
4 ;
3𝜋
4 ] rad).
4.2. Simulation experiments
The purpose of the first testing scenario is to provide extensive
validation of the proposed methodology in a low-cost and safe man-
ner before real-world deployment. Initially, the potential of the illegal
actions concept is demonstrated empirically, followed by experiments
regarding the framework’s robustness and generalization capabilities.
Lastly, some analysis on safety and speed concerns is conducted against
a state-of-the-art path planning method. These experiments were per-
formed on a device with the following specifications: CPU - Intel ®
Core™ i5-10600K, GPU - NVIDIA GeForce RTX 2060 6 GB, RAM -
16 GB.

===== PAGE 10 =====
Engineering Applications of Artificial Intelligence 133 (2024) 108506
10
M.I. Pereira and A.M. Pinto
Table 5
Analysis of the TF and IA methodologies on the training time (number of interactions) over 10 training instances per
methodology, with 2000 episodes per instance. One interaction corresponds to one instance of receiving the current
state, computing an action to take based on that state and performing it.
Methodology Training time (Interactions) Improvement over TF
Average Standard deviation (computed over the average training time)
TF 1.0192 × 105 1.0847 × 104 –
IA (𝑘𝑏2
= 2) 6.7904 × 104 4.5189 × 103 33.38%
IA (𝑘𝑏2
= 4) 6.3169 × 104 2.3312 × 103 38.02%
IA (𝑘𝑏2
= 8) 6.8847 × 104 5.4646 × 103 32.45%
Fig. 6. Three examples of the comparison between the IA and the TF strategies. The charts present a simple moving average of the cumulative reward throughout the agent’s
training.
4.2.1. Illegal Actions (IA) vs. Total Freedom (TF)
The first analysis on this work’s results concerns the illegal actions
strategy, developed to improve the agent’s exploration with action
spaces as disparate as the one defined in this task. To assess this
method’s effective contribution to the training process, a comparison
was made against a plain implementation in which the agent’s actions
are not limited, i.e., no modification was made to the PPO’s algorithm.
To enable a clear discussion of the results, the methodology using the
illegal actions concept proposed in this work is hereafter referred to as
IA, whereas the unmodified variant, that grants the vehicle with total
movement freedom, is specified as TF. Within the IA variant, three
different cases were studied regarding the duration of the blocking
temporal window: 𝑘𝑏2 = {2 , 4, 8} time-steps. Greater blockage times
were not explored because they would imply severe manoeuvrability
limitations, taking into account a velocity of 1 m s−1. Considering only
the berthing stage for this analysis, ten training instances were con-
ducted for each of the four strategies. Table 5 presents the average and
standard deviation of the training time for each methodology. Time
is quantified in interactions between the agent and the environment,
in which one interaction corresponds to one instance of receiving
the current state, computing an action to take based on that state
and performing it. Each training lasted 2000 episodes, but the total
number of interactions differs between training instances, because
the duration of each episode is variable. As depicted in Table 5 , all
three IA variants lead to a decrease of the training time of over 30%
compared to the TF methodology, with the case of 𝑘𝑏2 = 4 reaching
the fastest optimization (improvement of 38.02%). This variant also
produces more stable results between training samples, given the lower
standard deviation of the training time (2.3312 × 103 interactions), and,
thus, any further analysis concerning IA will consider 𝑘𝑏2 = 4 . Fig. 6
presents the evolution of the cumulative rewards for three sampled
training instances. The horizontal axis shows the number of interactions
between the agent and the environment. Overall, the IA method led to
an earlier convergence of the reward sum, that is, it required a lower
number of interactions to reach a stable and successful policy.
Fig. 7 helps to explain this observation. It presents the number
of episodes which terminated by means of the considered events:
{𝑡𝑎𝑟𝑔𝑒𝑡, 𝑐𝑜𝑙𝑙𝑖𝑠𝑖𝑜𝑛, 𝑡𝑢𝑟𝑛_𝑜𝑣𝑒𝑟, 𝑏𝑜𝑢𝑛𝑑𝑎𝑟𝑦}, during the first 200 episodes out
of a total of 2000. The depicted values represent the average computed
over the ten training instances of each methodology and uncover the
reason why the concept proposed in this article leads to a substantially
Fig. 7. Number of occurrences per event type during the first 200 episodes of the
berthing training, considering an average computed across the ten training instances.
The meaning of each event is: the vessel reaching its target position (Target); the vessel
overcoming the dynamic boundary (Boundary); the vessel colliding with another object
(Collision); or the vessel turning over (Turn Over).
lower training time. The IA method obtained a number of occurrences
per event in the first 200 episodes that is more evenly distributed
among the events, with the exception of 𝑡𝑢𝑟𝑛_𝑜𝑣𝑒𝑟. By blocking the
vessel from taking contrary actions sequentially, the algorithm enforced
its exploration and, as such, made the vessel experiment the different
termination events early in the training process. This strategy con-
tributed to a significant expansion of the agent’s knowledge in the
initial stage, which sped up the convergence of the cumulative rewards
during the berthing training. On the other hand, the TF method did
not restrict the agent’s action selection, which implied its movement
was not as broad and, thus, most of the initial episodes terminated
through the shrinking boundary condition, as observed in Fig. 7. Given
the conclusions drawn from this analysis, the docking algorithm was
fully trained (from berthing to approach stage) using IA and, thus, the
results presented throughout the rest of this section account for the
implementation of this concept.
4.2.2. Episode analysis
The convergence of the cumulative rewards and the number of
successful episodes do not determine per se the quality of the docking
algorithm. Other features should be scrutinized, such as the vessel’s
general behaviour throughout each docking episode, the sequence of
actions it takes and the evolution of its linear and angular velocities.

===== PAGE 11 =====
Engineering Applications of Artificial Intelligence 133 (2024) 108506
11
M.I. Pereira and A.M. Pinto
Fig. 8. Representation of the vessel’s trajectory in 10 sample episodes. The agent firstly reaches an intermediate zone in front of the docking structure (depicted by a red rectangle)
and then moves straight towards the target position.
Fig. 8 illustrates an interesting observation of the agent’s behaviour.
Considering no other obstacle in the scene besides the docking struc-
ture, the most efficient path for the vessel to take would be to move in a
straight line to the dock’s entry. Instead, the agent inherently learnt to
reach an intermediate zone (depicted by a red rectangle in the figure),
and then entering the structure already with the desired heading and
quite centred within the passageway. This docking approach is not
the optimal one in terms of minimizing the distance covered by the
trajectory, but it does prevent collisions in a more effective manner
and, thus, ensures a safer completion of the docking process. This
strategy was not directly taught to the network, given that, unlike other
works (Amendola et al. , 2020), this work does not provide the agent
with intermediate target poses, but only with the final pose within
the structure. As such, the vessel learnt this behaviour through the
collision risk assessment that it was provided with and through the
consequences it received when interpreting this risk. Additionally, the
IA methodology helped the agent learn the intermediate steps that lead
to either collision or successful conclusion of the episode, and, thus, it
constructed a strategy that avoids proximity to other obstacles as much
as possible, especially during rotational movement.
The agent’s behaviour throughout the docking maneuver can be
discussed more in depth by analysing Fig. 9 , which depicts a sam-
pled testing episode. This particular episode lasted 126 interactions,
which correspond to 25.2 s. On average, the tested docking episodes
lasted 123 interactions ( 24.6 s). For this specific case, the evolution
of the vessel’s position and heading errors regarding the target pose,
previously referred to as 𝑑𝑖𝑠𝑡 and 𝜓, is depicted in Figs. 9(a) and
9(b), respectively. Both errors converge to approximately 0 m and 0 rad,
although the heading error achieves this target earlier in the episode,
which can be explained by the behaviour described above, in which
the agent reaches an intermediate zone prior to entering the docking
structure already with the desired heading. In fact, to understand how
the agent accomplishes this, Figs. 9(c) to 9(f) illustrate the linear and
angular velocities throughout the episode divided into the two main
stages: approach (9(c) and 9(d)) and berthing (9(e) and 9(f)). In all four
figures, the linear velocity is represented in blue, whereas the angular
velocity is coloured in orange; the velocity command is represented by
a solid line, whereas the actual velocity, constrained by the vehicle’s
dynamics and the environment, is depicted by a dashed line. The
approach stage initiates with the vessel rotating approximately towards
the intermediate zone, moving in its direction and reorienting itself
according to the target heading. As expected, the frequency of the
commands increases as the vehicle gets closer to the structure. Fig. 9(e)
demonstrates that the agent effectively learnt to use the two velocity
levels (fast and slow) correctly, given that at first it chooses quicker
movement and then switches to a slower approach as it draws near
the target pose, in order not to collide with the docking structure. The
chosen action sequence ensured that the vessel’s velocity decreased
gradually in the final interactions of the docking episode. A video
of three docking instances was recorded in scenarios constructed in
simulator Gazebo.2
4.2.3. Robustness to unknown conditions
As outlined throughout this work, one of the core objectives was
to develop a framework with great capability of adaptation to unseen
conditions. This section describes two different sets of experiments to
demonstrate the robustness of the proposed research when performing
in unknown environments: firstly, considering the effect of waves and
wind, and secondly, incorporating different types of docking structures
into the scenario according to the most common layouts found in
commercial harbours.
Performance under environmental constraints. Environmental constraints
predominant in maritime scenarios, such as wind and ocean waves, are
still disregarded by many authors and, yet, highly affect navigation
systems (Rees, 2021). This concern was not overlooked in this work,
and Gazebo’s features to simulate such conditions were put to use.
Ocean waves are replicated by the sum of sinusoidal waves, whereas
wind is reproduced by its 𝑥, 𝑦 and 𝑦𝑎𝑤 coefficients and speeds ( Sarda
et al., 2016). Each wave component is characterized by its amplitude,
period and direction in the 𝑥 and 𝑦 axes.
The Beaufort Scale (World Meteorological Organization, 1970) clas-
sifies the intensity of wind based on its speed and on observed condi-
tions at sea or on land, and the Douglas Sea Scale ( Curto et al., 2021)
measures the height of the waves. Due to its weight and dimensions, the
2 https://youtu.be/1IhD9AhRI-k

===== PAGE 12 =====
Engineering Applications of Artificial Intelligence 133 (2024) 108506
12
M.I. Pereira and A.M. Pinto
Fig. 9. Position (a) and heading (b) errors throughout the episode’s interactions. Command and real velocities through the two docking stages: approach (c,d) and berthing (e,f).
SENSE ASV is able to operate under environmental constraints that cor-
respond to levels 0 to 3 of both scales. Harsher conditions would cause
this vessel to turn over. As such, this section presents some experiments
conducted in scenarios that simulate the conditions of those four levels.
Seven different scenarios were defined according to Table 6 : Scn1 to
Scn7, where the former is the easiest setting and the latter is the most
challenging. Each scenario is characterized by three wave components
and one wind component. Fig. 10 illustrates two examples of wave
components ( 10(a) and 10(b) ), as well as their sum 10(c) , which
represents the actual wave that affects the vessel’s movement. In this

===== PAGE 13 =====
Engineering Applications of Artificial Intelligence 133 (2024) 108506
13
M.I. Pereira and A.M. Pinto
Fig. 10. Simulated wave components 1 (a) and 2 (b), as well as their sum (c). In this work, each scenario is characterized by three wave components.
Fig. 11. Five of the most common dock models found in commercial harbours according to Pereira et al. ( 2021a). The illustrated layouts are Y-Shape (a), U-shape (b), T-shape
(c), L-shape (d), and Straight (e).
Table 6
Scenario characterization according to the Beaufort Scale and the Douglas Sea Scale.
Scenario Beaufort Scale Douglas Sea Scale Maximum wave
amplitude ( m)
Wind speed
(m s−1)
Scn1 0 1 0.10 0.2
Scn2 1 1 0.17 0.5
Scn3 1 1 0.24 0.8
Scn4 1 1 0.29 1.4
Scn5 2 1 0.38 2.0
Scn6 2 2 0.50 2.6
Scn7 3 3 0.62 3.4
Table 7
Average results over 100 testing episodes per scenario (Scn1 to Scn7).
Scenario Average position error ( m) Average heading error ( rad)
Scn1 0.329 0.0241
Scn2 0.344 0.0240
Scn3 0.354 0.0295
Scn4 0.373 0.0401
Scn5 0.436 0.0464
Scn6 0.485 0.0524
Scn7 0.542 0.0544
experiment, the first wave component has the greatest amplitude and
also the greatest period (7 s). The third component simulates the ocean
ripple and therefore has a higher frequency (period of 2 s) but also a
lower amplitude. The middle component has intermediate amplitude
and period ( 5 s). The direction of the waves and wind elements were
varied within each scenario according to: ( ⃗ 𝑥, ⃗ 𝑦) = (𝜆𝑥 ⋅ 0.7, 𝜆𝑦 ⋅ 0.7),
where 𝜆𝑥 and 𝜆𝑦 can either be −1 or 1.
Each scenario was tested for 100 docking episodes in the simulator
Gazebo. Table 7 presents the position and heading errors at the end of
the testing episodes, averaged per scenario. All seven cases achieved
a success rate of 100%. However, the positional error at the end of
the docking maneuver increases with the aggravation of the scenario’s
constraints, with a minimum error of 0.329 m for Scn1 and a maximum
one of 0.542 m for Scn7. The average heading error follows a similar
tendency, varying between 0.0240 rad and 0.0544 rad. The harshness of
the constraints portrayed in these simulations greatly increases between
the first and last scenarios, but the position and heading errors only
expand by 1.65 and 2.27 times, respectively. Considering maximum
allowed position and heading errors of 1.0 m and 0.2 rad for achiev-
ing a successful docking episode, the worst case scenario of these
experiments obtained errors of approximately half of those parameters’
thresholds. Therefore, these results demonstrate that the agent was able
to complete the maneuver within the safety parameters and with a
conservative margin through all the scenario types.
Generalization to commercial docking structures. A robust docking sys-
tem should retain its accuracy when operating in different scenarios
and with different berthing structures, even if these were not seen
during the algorithm’s development stage. This was one of the motives
for selecting an architecture based on Reinforcement Learning, since
the knowledge gathered by the agent during the training stage can
be generalized to diverse environments and does not need manual
fine-tuning adapted to each new scenario. According to previous stud-
ies (Pereira et al., 2021a), there are five main docking structure layouts
within commercial harbours, which are illustrated in Fig. 11 . The
layouts in the figure are represented by Gazebo models that were used
for simulating docking scenarios different from the one adopted so far
which used only a ‘‘U-shape’’ dock, depicted in Fig. 11 (b). Unlike the
U layout, some of the other dock types allow for more than one type
of docking maneuver, e.g., frontward or side-ways approach, which
further adds complexity to the task.
A study was conducted to measure the system’s performance when
dealing with these unseen docking structures. A total of 1000 episodes
evenly distributed across the five types of docking layouts were tested
in Gazebo and led to an average success rate of 99.9%, with one
collision occurrence for dock type Y, which is the most complex layout
and the least commonly found in harbours. A sample of these testing
episodes were recorded in video. 3
4.2.4. Comparison to conventional methods
As one of the first RL-based approaches towards autonomous dock-
ing, there are not many baselines available for performance compar-
ison. A cautious analysis can be conducted using traditional methods
that share some of the objectives of the proposed methodology, even
if the core concepts significantly differ. Given the scope of this work,
which focuses on intelligent decision-making rather than on enforcing
specific low-level behaviour, this comparative experiment should be
conducted among motion planning methodologies. For example, A* is a
path-searching method known for its efficiency and completeness (Hart
et al., 1968). It aims to find the shortest path between any two points
on a grid-based map that includes obstacle information. Similarly to
RL-based approaches, A* can be used to tackle high-level autonomous
navigation with obstacle avoidance, although it simply provides target
waypoints to be followed by the agent, whereas the proposed method
constitutes an end-to-end framework, from state to action. In this
analysis, the path computed by the A* algorithm is enforced on the
agent using a simple PID controller. Moreover, the A*-based method
requires careful parameter tuning to be deployed in different scenarios
3 https://youtu.be/1%5fFzU-fnyvY

===== PAGE 14 =====
Engineering Applications of Artificial Intelligence 133 (2024) 108506
14
M.I. Pereira and A.M. Pinto
Fig. 12. Representation of three pairs of trajectories obtained by the A* (yellow) and the RL-based (red) methods. A* finds the shortest path to the target point, but it leads the
agent closer to obstacles. RL takes a longer but safer trajectory.
or with different agents, whereas the approach proposed in this work
can be readily used in unknown setups.
Considering this interpretation, a ROS-based implementation of A*
was adapted to the problem at hand, using a grid-based map with a
resolution of 0.15 m and an obstacle inflation radius equal to the length
of the vehicle’s model ( 1.50 m). Both the A* and RL-based methods
were tested for 100 docking episodes in the simulator Gazebo, with
initial poses for the agent being randomly selected according to the
ranges presented in Section 4.1 . Both methods achieved a success
rate of 100%, and Fig. 12 depicts a few of the resulting trajectories.
Performance was analysed according to episode duration and collision
risk. The latter criterion is given by computing the average of the
maximum collision risk parameter in any direction throughout the
testing episodes, and it varies between 0 and 1. The RL-based approach
obtained an average episode duration of 182.3 interactions ( 36.5 s),
whereas A* achieved 176.3 interactions ( 35.3 s). The average risk pa-
rameter was 0.26 and 0.47, for RL and A*, respectively. The more
traditional approach managed to find the shortest path to the target
point, as depicted in Fig. 12 , which does not necessarily correspond
to a considerably lower episode duration given the sharper changes of
direction required to complete the path. On the other hand, the RL-
based algorithm produced a longer trajectory but a safer one, given
the behaviour discussed in the previous subsection, in which the agent
reaches an intermediate zone before entering the berthing phase to
avoid proximity to other obstacles. The benefit of this trend is con-
firmed by the significant difference between the average collision risk
of the two methods. The A* algorithm obtained a risk parameter 1.8
times greater because its resulting paths lead to a much greater close-
ness to the docking structure. This divergence between the trajectories
produced by the two methods can be explained by the fact that the A*
algorithm applies to generic contexts, whereas the development of the
RL framework took into account the limitations faced specifically by
the majority of maritime vehicles. While learning, the RL agent had to
deal with the lack of degrees of freedom to which differential vessels are
subjected to, and as such it grasped a way of guiding the ASV towards
its target while avoiding maneuvers which are difficult for this type of
vehicle to perform, especially in close range to structures.
Moreover, to demonstrate the superior resilience of the RL-based
method to unseen conditions when compared to the more traditional
approach, further experiments were conducted under the environmen-
tal constraints portrayed by the scenarios presented in the previous
section. Table 8 presents the success rate and the average collision risk
for the two methods when performing under scenarios Scn1 to Scn7.
As explained previously, the proposed framework is able to maintain
a success rate of 100% for all degrees of environmental constraints.
Predictably, the average collision risk gradually increases: from 0.26 to
Table 8
Success rate (0 to 100%) and average collision risk (0 to 1) over 100 testing episodes
per scenario (Scn1 to Scn7) and per method (RL vs. A*).
Scenario Success rate Average collision risk
RL A* RL A*
Scn1 100% 100% 0.26 0.47
Scn2 100% 100% 0.28 0.48
Scn3 100% 100% 0.27 0.51
Scn4 100% 96% 0.29 0.55
Scn5 100% 91% 0.29 0.58
Scn6 100% 89% 0.31 0.60
Scn7 100% 83% 0.32 0.63
0.32 for the harshest scenario. These results remain considerably below
the outcome of the A* method in the easiest setting, which obtained
an average risk of 0.47. The increase in severity of the wind and ocean
waves produces a more drastic result for this conventional approach.
The more unreliable trajectories seen above lead to some collision
occurrences when the vehicle is subject to greater external disturbance.
As such, the success rate drops from 100% in the fourth scenario and
decreases to 83% for Scn7. This lower performance is reflected in the
greater average collision risk, which is approximately double that of
the RL method in the harshest scenario.
The presented work can also be evaluated against other methods
regarding the computational time required to process the perception
information to obtain a decision for the agent at each iteration. For the
proposed framework, this metric includes any point cloud processing,
collision risk assessment, and the network inference time, whereas for
the A*-based implementation, the map update and path generation
are taken into account. The results of this experiment are depicted
in Table 9, and demonstrate the superiority of the RL-based method,
which achieved an average processing time of 6 ms, whereas the more
conventional approach required approximately 15 ms, considering a
map resolution of 0.15 m, as indicated in the beginning of the section.
Different resolution values were also experimented with, to approxi-
mate the A*-based method to a continuous scenario, as considered in
the RL case. As portrayed in the table, lower resolution values, which
correspond to more accurate representations of the environment, lead
to considerably higher processing times, but did not achieve the low
collision risk produced by RL. On the other hand, greater resolution
values decrease inference time at the expense or riskier trajectories.
The A* method would take further effort of parameter tuning to reach a
more conservative obstacle avoidance component and there would still
be no guarantee of the resulting path being the most appropriate for
maritime vehicles or of the inference time standing within a reasonable
interval to enable autonomous navigation.

===== PAGE 15 =====
Engineering Applications of Artificial Intelligence 133 (2024) 108506
15
M.I. Pereira and A.M. Pinto
Fig. 13. The SENSE ASV during a docking episode in the water tank of the Civil Engineering Department of the Faculty of Engineering of the University of Porto, Portugal. The
scenario features an L-shaped dock with a reflective beacon localization system. Frames (a), (b), and (c) depict the beginning, middle and end of the episode, respectively.
Table 9
Inference time (ms) and average collision risk (0 to 1) considering a continuous state
representation for RL, and different grid map resolutions for A*.
RL A*
(continuous state) Grid map resolution (m)
0.05 0.10 0.15 0.20 0.25
Inference time (ms) 6 101 64 15 13 9
Average collision risk 0.26 0.31 0.41 0.47 0.52 0.54
4.3. Validation in controlled scenario
One of this research’s objectives was to advance the transition from
the scientific domain to the technological one for autonomous docking,
which could only be obtained through validation outside simulated en-
vironments. A set of hardware-in-the-loop trials enables the evaluation
of the developed framework considering the constraints of real vehicles.
Fig. 13 depicts the SENSE ASV within the indoor tank of the Civil
Engineering Department of the Faculty of Engineering of the University
of Porto, Portugal, where this set of experiments took place. Given that
this is a GPS-denied environment, the docking framework relied on a
reflective beacon localization system that used LiDAR point clouds to
obtain the navigation-based features of the state space. This beacon
system was only used for localization purposes, not for detecting the
docking structure. As illustrated in the figure, the testing scenario
featured an L-shaped dock made from extruded polystyrene foam (XPS)
with dimensions 2.60 × 3 .30 × 0 .20 m.
This experiment consisted of a total of 28 testing episodes, in which
the ASV began its maneuver from randomly selected poses. The initial
distance between the vehicle and the target varied between 3.049 m
and 5.486 m, and its initial heading ranged between −1.8306 rad and
0.5796 rad. The criteria for episode termination are those presented in
Table 4, as previously described, including a distance threshold ( 𝜖𝑑𝑖𝑠𝑡)
of 1.0 m and a heading threshold ( 𝜖𝜃) of 0.2 rad. In this experiment, 27
episodes resulted in successful docking, which means the developed
framework achieved a success rate of 96.4%. The average position
and heading errors were of 0.965 m and 0.1732 rad, respectively, with
maximum values of 0.997 m and 0.1997 rad, and minimum values of
0.084 m and 0.0163 rad. An average distance between the vehicle and
the target of over 0.9 m constitutes an increase when compared to the
tests presented in previous sections, but it actually represents the result
of safer maneuvers. The low value of the maximum velocity adopted
in these experiments enabled the vehicle to reduce its speed earlier
and, therefore, stop before the target, thus decreasing the probability
of colliding with the docking structure. In this experiment, a single
episode failed to terminate successfully. During this attempt, the vessel
was able to reach the target within the distance threshold but it
could not achieve the desired heading within the episode’s maximum
duration.
Fig. 14 depicts a few of the successful trajectories to reach the
docking target. The red circumference of radius equal to the distance
threshold (𝜖𝑑𝑖𝑠𝑡) represents the range within which the vehicle should
be positioned for the episode to terminate successfully. The red/green
xy referential at the centre of the circumference depicts the ideal final
pose, while the frame at the end of each path represents the vessel’s
actual orientation at the end of the episode. As previously explained,
the majority of the docking episodes terminate before the vessel reaches
the docking target, which results in a higher position error but in a
lower collision risk with the docking structure. The path coloured in
light brown represents 1 out of 3 docking instances in which the vehicle
did not dock at first attempt, but instead it reached the structure with
an offset in the y axis relative to the target spot and then moved
backward a little to adjust its position and reach the distance threshold.
This behaviour was not explicitly taught during the training process but
was inherently learnt by the network after failed attempts. Most of the
depicted trajectories present the behaviour described in Section 4.2.2 ,
in which the vessel does not move in a straight line to the target,
but reaches an intermediate zone first and then moves forward to the
structure, for increased safety. The trajectories that do not conform to
this behaviour, such as the blue and brown ones, departed from poses
that were not considered as starting points during the training process
(due to the utilized U-shaped docking structure). Nonetheless, even in
these cases the vessel was able to reach the target within the safety
parameters. On average, the 27 episodes lasted 118 interactions each
(23.6 s).
A sample of the described experiment was recorded in video, 4
along with a brief explanation of the vessel’s behaviour throughout the
docking maneuver.
4.4. Validation in real harbour
The final validation scenario took place in the ATLANTIS Test Cen-
tre (Pinto et al., 2021), in Viana do Castelo, Portugal. This is a testing
platform for maritime O&M robotics, that includes a coastal testbed
which features a floating foundation from an offshore wind turbine,
as well as multiple docking structures. As previously mentioned, the
vessel used in these tests was the Nautilus ASV ( Campos et al., 2024),
developed by INESC TEC, which is depicted in Fig. 15 during an
operation at the test centre. Throughout the experiments, the registered
environmental conditions were the following: wind of [4,5]m s−1; wind
gusts of [7,9] m s−1; and waves of two swell components (swell 1 -
amplitude of 0.9 m and period of 6 s; swell 2 - amplitude of 0.2 m and
period of 10 s). This set of conditions reach level 5 of the Beaufort
Scale and the upper end of level 3 of the Douglas Sea Scale, and thus
represent a scenario which is harsher than the most severe scenario
portrayed in Section 4.2.3 - Robustness to Environmental Constraints.
In this experiment, ten successful docking episodes were achieved,
in which the agent’s initial distance to the target varied between
12.705 m and 21.806 m, and its initial heading error extended from
−1.507 rad to 0.858 rad. Regarding the criteria for episode termination,
the linear and angular velocity thresholds, 𝜖𝑣𝑙𝑖𝑛 and 𝜖𝑣𝑎𝑛𝑔 , were loosened
to 0.4 m s−1 and 0.1 rad s−1, respectively, due to the strong current at
4 https://youtu.be/enZokPfH-bU

===== PAGE 16 =====
Engineering Applications of Artificial Intelligence 133 (2024) 108506
16
M.I. Pereira and A.M. Pinto
Fig. 14. Representation of the vessel’s trajectory in 7 sample episodes. The red circumference of radius equal to 1.0 m (𝜖𝑑𝑖𝑠𝑡) depicts the range within which the vehicle is considered
to be correctly positioned. The xy frame in the centre of the circumference corresponds to the target pose, and the frame at the end of each trajectory represents the final orientation
of the vehicle.
Fig. 15. The Nautilus ASV operating in the ATLANTIS Test Centre, in Viana do Castelo, Portugal.
the time of testing. The distance ( 𝜖𝑑𝑖𝑠𝑡) and heading ( 𝜖𝜃) thresholds
were kept at 1.0 m and 0.2 rad, respectively, according to the training
procedure and the previous testing scenarios. Over the ten docking
samples, the framework obtained average position and heading errors
of 0.841 m and 0.117 rad, which can be placed well within the cor-
responding thresholds. An average episode lasted 177.3 interactions,
i.e., approximately 35.5 s.
Fig. 16 depicts four of the ten docking episodes of this experiment.
For each of the four episodes, the starting pose is represented by
𝑃𝑖, 𝑖 ∈ {0 , 1, 2, 3}, while the trajectories performed by the vehicle are
depicted by yellow lines, and a visual model of the Nautilus ASV is
represented at the target pose. These episodes featured two different
docking structures and varied initial poses. All trajectories seem to be
slightly disrupted by the environmental constraints, in particular by
the wave components (swell 1 and 2), given that the vessel’s trajectory
presents some overshoot when it moves perpendicularly to the waves
direction. This idea is supported by Fig. 17 , representative of the path
beginning in pose 𝑃2, in which the left vertical axis shows the derivative
of the vessel’s heading ( ̇ 𝜓), and as such, relates to the trajectory’s
smoothness, while the right vertical axis presents the difference in
heading ( 𝛥𝜓𝑤𝑎𝑣𝑒𝑠) between the vessel and the waves (given by the
combination of the swell components). The chart demonstrates that

===== PAGE 17 =====
Engineering Applications of Artificial Intelligence 133 (2024) 108506
17
M.I. Pereira and A.M. Pinto
Fig. 16. Representation of Nautilus’ trajectory (yellow) in four sample docking episodes in two different docking structures at the ATLANTIS Test Centre. For each of the four
docking episodes, the starting pose is represented by 𝑃𝑖, 𝑖 ∈ {0 , 1, 2, 3}, and the ASV is depicted at the target pose. The direction of the wind and wave components (swell 1 and
2) is outlined in the bottom right corner of the figure.
Fig. 17. Analysis of the trajectory beginning in pose 𝑃2. The left vertical axis shows
the derivative of the vessel’s heading ( ̇ 𝜓), while the right vertical axis presents the
difference in heading between the vessel and the waves ( 𝛥𝜓𝑤𝑎𝑣𝑒𝑠).
when the ASV is moving relatively parallel to the waves, then ̇ 𝜓
remains fairly stable. The abrupt heading variation at the start of the
episode corresponds to the initial reorientation of the vessel, when
no translation takes place. On the other hand, when 𝛥𝜓𝑤𝑎𝑣𝑒𝑠 draws
closer to 𝜋
2 rad (≈1.571 rad), the heading derivative becomes more
volatile, alternating between the positive and negative ranges. This
instability results from the framework’s response to counteract these
environmental disturbances, not only to return to an optimal path
towards the target but also to avoid collision with the docking structure
which features in close range to the vessel during the second half of this
particular episode. Such response is enabled by the framework’s ability
to adapt to unpredictable states, leveraged by the onboard perception
system, and so these disruptions end up not hindering the success of
the docking maneuver.
Three other sampled episodes were recorded in a video 5 which
better depicts the testing environment, along with the environmental
constraints and the crowdedness of the harbour. In one of the docking
5 https://youtu.be/DgsDWZ5WgIM
episodes presented in the video, the agent’s action is seen to be dis-
turbed by a set of larger waves, caused by the movement of a bigger
vessel. However, the framework manages to redirect the agent to a
converging trajectory that prevents collision to the structure, and the
docking episode terminates with success. Despite being more challeng-
ing, this episode achieved position and heading errors of m0.857 and
0.015 rad, respectively, which scarcely deviate from the average results
obtained during these tests. In a different episode, depicted in the
sequential frames of Fig. 18, the agent is faced with an obstacle between
its initial and target poses. The agent is able to deviate from said
obstacle and conclude the docking maneuver, owing to its onboard
perception system and the diversified framework training process.
To the best of the authors’ knowledge, this is the first RL-based
autonomous docking framework for ASVs to be tested in a real environ-
ment. The results presented in this work depict not only the potential
of the methodology, but also its robustness and flexibility. These final
validation tests covered greater distances than those portrayed in sce-
narios (i) and (ii), as well as harsher environmental conditions, which
demonstrates the capability of the RL framework to adapt to different
and more difficult backgrounds without retraining. This methodology’s
versatility is further evidenced by having been validated with two dif-
ferent ASVs (SENSE and Nautilus), with different sizes, configurations
and velocities of operation. The use of different localization methods
and the fact that all situational awareness is computed through the
onboard perception system show that the docking framework can be
readily deployed to unknown and complex scenarios.
5. Conclusion
This article proposed a framework for autonomous docking of
surface vehicles in real environments through a Deep Reinforcement
Learning agent. The concept of illegal actions was introduced to improve
the agent’s exploration during the learning process, by increasing the
coherence of action selection from a high-level action space. This re-
search also allowed to validate the potential of A2C-based architectures
for critical decision-making problems, such as docking operations. Un-
like most of the current methods, this work addressed some challenges

===== PAGE 18 =====
Engineering Applications of Artificial Intelligence 133 (2024) 108506
18
M.I. Pereira and A.M. Pinto
Fig. 18. The Nautilus ASV during a docking episode at the ATLANTIS Test Centre, in which the RL agent is able to deviate from an obstacle using information from the vessel’s
onboard perception system.
presented in real-world scenarios, such as environmental constraints
(wind and waves) and the lack of prior knowledge of the scene. By
computing all situational awareness using the vessel’s onboard percep-
tion system, this framework is able to guide the agent into unknown
scenarios.
The methodology based on the concept of illegal actions was thor-
oughly tested and demonstrated a reduction of 38.02% on the frame-
work’s optimization time, by focusing the training process on meaning-
ful experiences met by the agent. A comprehensive analysis showed ro-
bustness to different environmental conditions, according to the Beau-
fort Scale (levels 0 to 5) and the Douglas Sea Scale (levels 1 to 3), and
also considering different types of docking structures. Moreover, a com-
parative analysis with a state-of-the-art path planning method demon-
strated the superior ability of the developed learning-based framework
regarding safety, inference time and generalization. The developed
framework was tested using a real ASV in a controlled scenario, having
obtained a success rate of 96.4%. Validation in a real harbour with a
different vehicle, and under more severe weather conditions, showed
the framework’s ability to maintain a solid performance, unlike other
RL-based works that went through real-world deployment. In conclu-
sion, the proposed framework optimized the training of an RL agent
that resulted in a robust autonomous docking methodology which does
not rely on a priori knowledge of the scenario and can be deployed to
real-world setups.
Future research lines could involve experimenting in more complex
scenarios, while using different types of surface vehicles, such as holo-
nomic ones, to fully understand the generalization capabilities of the
developed framework. Furthermore, the pipeline could be improved by
simplifying the pre-processing stages and providing rawer perception
data to the network so that the system becomes even less dependent on
specific scenarios. Lastly, the proposed framework could be integrated
with a docking structures detection system to achieve an end-to-end
operation.
CRediT authorship contribution statement
Maria Inês Pereira: Conceptualization, Data curation, Formal anal-
ysis, Investigation, Methodology, Software, Validation, Visualization,
Writing – original draft, Writing – review & editing. Andry Maykol
Pinto: Conceptualization, Formal analysis, Funding acquisition, Inves-
tigation, Methodology, Project administration, Resources, Supervision,
Validation, Writing – review & editing.
Declaration of competing interest
The authors declare that they have no known competing finan-
cial interests or personal relationships that could have appeared to
influence the work reported in this paper.
Data availability
No data was used for the research described in the article.
Acknowledgements
This work is partly funded by the Portuguese Government through
the FCT - Foundation for Science and Technology within the Ph.D. stu-
dentship 2021.05561.BD (to MP), and by the European Union’s Horizon
2020 - The EU Framework Programme for Research and Innovation
2014–2020, under grant agreement No. 871571 (ATLANTIS).
References
Alexandru Zamfirache, I., Precup, R.-E., Roman, R.-C., Petriu, E.M., 2023. Neural
network-based control using actor-critic reinforcement learning and grey wolf
optimizer with experimental servo system validation. Expert Syst. Appl. 225,
120112. http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.eswa.2023.120112.
Amendola, J., Miura, L.S., Costa, A.H.R., Cozman, F.G., Tannuri, E.A., 2020. Navigation
in restricted channels under environmental conditions: Fast-time simulation by
asynchronous deep reinforcement learning. IEEE Access 8, 149199–149213. http:
//dx.doi.org/10.1109/ACCESS.2020.3015661.
Anderlini, E., Parker, G.G., Thomas, G., 2019. Docking control of an autonomous
underwater vehicle using reinforcement learning. Appl. Sci. 9 (17), http://dx.doi.
org/10.3390/app9173456.
Bartels, S., Helling, S., Meurer, T., 2022. Rope-assisted docking maneuvers for au-
tonomous surface vessels. In: 2022 Am. Cont. Conf.. ACC, pp. 2315–2320. http:
//dx.doi.org/10.23919/ACC53348.2022.9867315.
Bjering Strand, H., 2020. Autonomous Docking Control System for the Otter USV: A
Machine Learning Approach. (Master’s thesis). Norwegian University of Science and
Technology (NTNU).
Cai, W., Zhang, M., Yang, Q., Wang, C., Shi, J., 2023. Long-range UWB positioning-
based automatic docking trajectory design for unmanned surface vehicle. IEEE
Trans. Instrum. Meas. 72, 1–12. http://dx.doi.org/10.1109/TIM.2023.3271005 .
Campos, D.F., Gonçalves, E.P., Campos, H.J., Pereira, M.I., Pinto, A.M., 2024. Nautilus:
An autonomous surface vehicle with a multilayer software architecture for offshore
inspection. J. Field Rob. http://dx.doi.org/10.1002/rob.22304 .
Campos, D.F., Matos, A., Pinto, A.M., 2019. An adaptive velocity obstacle avoidance
algorithm for autonomous surface vehicles. In: Proc. - 2019 IEEE/RSJ Int. Conf.
Intell. Robot. Syst.. IROS, Macau, China, pp. 8089–8096. http://dx.doi.org/10.
1109/IROS40897.2019.8968156.
Campos, D., Matos, A., Pinto, A., 2021a. Multi-domain inspection of offshore wind
farms using an autonomous surface vehicle. SN Appl. Sci. 3 (455), http://dx.doi.
org/10.1007/s42452-021-04451-5 .
Campos, D.F., Pereira, M., Matos, A., Pinto, A.M., 2021b. DIIUS - distributed perception
for inspection of aquatic structures. In: OCEANS 2021: San Diego – Porto. pp. 1–5.
http://dx.doi.org/10.23919/OCEANS44145.2021.9705939.
Cao, X., Sun, C., Yan, M., 2019. Target search control of AUV in underwater
environment with deep reinforcement learning. IEEE Access 7, 96549–96559.
http://dx.doi.org/10.1109/ACCESS.2019.2929120.
Capra, L., Brandonisio, A., Lavagna, M., 2023. Network architecture and action space
analysis for deep reinforcement learning towards spacecraft autonomous guidance.
Adv. Space Res. 71 (9), 3787–3802. http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.asr.2022.11.048 .
Cebollada, S., Payá, L., Flores, M., Peidró, A., Reinoso, O., 2021. A state-of-the-art
review on mobile robotics tasks using artificial intelligence and visual data. Expert
Syst. Appl. 167, 114195. http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.eswa.2020.114195 .
Chang, L., Shan, L., Jiang, C., Dai, Y., 2021. Reinforcement based mobile robot path
planning with improved dynamic window approach in unknown environment.
Auton. Rob. 45, http://dx.doi.org/10.1007/s10514-020-09947-4 .
Chu, Z., Wang, F., Lei, T., Luo, C., 2023. Path planning based on deep reinforcement
learning for autonomous underwater vehicles under ocean current disturbance. IEEE
Trans. Intell. Veh. 8 (1), 108–120. http://dx.doi.org/10.1109/TIV.2022.3153352 .
Chun, D.-H., Roh, M.-I., Lee, H.-W., Ha, J., Yu, D., 2021. Deep reinforcement learning-
based collision avoidance for an autonomous ship. Ocean Eng. 234, 109216.
http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.oceaneng.2021.109216.

===== PAGE 19 =====
Engineering Applications of Artificial Intelligence 133 (2024) 108506
19
M.I. Pereira and A.M. Pinto
Claro, R., Silva, R., Pinto, A., 2020. Detection and mapping of monopiles in offshore
wind farms using autonomous surface vehicles. In: Global Oceans 2020: Singa-
pore – U.S. Gulf Coast. pp. 1–4. http://dx.doi.org/10.1109/IEEECONF38699.2020.
9389348.
Curto, D., Franzitta, V., Guercio, A., 2021. Sea wave energy. a review of the
current technologies and perspectives. Energies 14 (20), http://dx.doi.org/10.3390/
en14206604.
Dann, M., Thangarajah, J., 2021. Adapting to reward progressivity via spectral
reinforcement learning. http://dx.doi.org/10.48550/arXiv.2104.14138, arXiv:2104.
14138.
Darbra, R.M., Casal, J., 2004. Historical analysis of accidents in seaports. Saf. Sci. 42
(2), 85–98. http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/S0925-7535(03)00002-X.
de Bruin, T., Kober, J., Tuyls, K., Babuška, R., 2018. Integrating state representa-
tion learning into deep reinforcement learning. IEEE Rob. Autom. Lett. 3 (3),
1394–1401. http://dx.doi.org/10.1109/LRA.2018.2800101.
Duguleana, M., Mogan, G., 2016. Neural networks based reinforcement learning for
mobile robots obstacle avoidance. Expert Syst. Appl. 62, 104–115. http://dx.doi.
org/10.1016/j.eswa.2016.06.021.
Garaffa, L.C., Basso, M., Konzen, A.A., de Freitas, E.P., 2021. Reinforcement learning
for mobile robotics exploration: A survey. IEEE Trans. Neural Netw. Learn. Syst.
1–15. http://dx.doi.org/10.1109/TNNLS.2021.3124466.
Gjærum, V.B., Rørvik, E.-L.H., Lekkas, A.M., 2021. Approximating a deep rein-
forcement learning docking agent using linear model trees. In: 2021 European
Control Conference. ECC, pp. 1465–1471. http://dx.doi.org/10.23919/ECC54610.
2021.9655007.
Grondman, I., Busoniu, L., Lopes, G.A.D., Babuska, R., 2012. A survey of actor-critic
reinforcement learning: Standard and natural policy gradients. IEEE Trans. Syst.
Man Cybern. Part C Appl. Rev. 42 (6), 1291–1307. http://dx.doi.org/10.1109/
TSMCC.2012.2218595.
Hadi, B., Khosravi, A., Sarhadi, P., 2024. Adaptive formation motion planning and
control of autonomous underwater vehicles using deep reinforcement learning. IEEE
J. Oceanic Eng. 49 (1), 311–328. http://dx.doi.org/10.1109/JOE.2023.3278290.
Hameed, M.S.A., Chadha, G.S., Schwung, A., Ding, S.X., 2021. Gradient monitored
reinforcement learning. IEEE Trans. Neural Netw. Learn. Syst. 1–14. http://dx.doi.
org/10.1109/TNNLS.2021.3119853.
Hart, P.E., Nilsson, N.J., Raphael, B., 1968. A formal basis for the heuristic deter-
mination of minimum cost paths. EEE Trans. Syst. Sci. Cybern. 4 (2), 100–107.
http://dx.doi.org/10.1109/TSSC.1968.300136.
Higo, Y., Sakano, M., Nobe, H., Hashimoto, H., 2023. Development of trajectory-
tracking maneuvering system for automatic berthing/unberthing based on double
deep Q-network and experimental validation with an actual large ferry. Ocean Eng.
287, 115750. http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.oceaneng.2023.115750.
Holen, M., Ruud, E.-L.M., Warakagoda, N.D., Goodwin, M., Engelstad, P., Knaus-
gård, K.M., 2022. Towards using reinforcement learning for autonomous docking of
unmanned surface vehicles. In: Eng. Appl. Neural Networks. Springer International
Publishing, Cham, pp. 461–474. http://dx.doi.org/10.1007/978-3-031-08223-8_38.
Hu, Y., Wang, W., Jia, H., Wang, Y., Chen, Y., Hao, J., Wu, F., Fan, C., 2020. Learning
to utilize shaping rewards: A new approach of reward shaping. In: 34th Conf.
Neural Inf. Proc. Syst. (NeurIPS 2020). Vol. 33, pp. 15931–15941.
Kim, H., Kim, D., Park, B., Lee, S.-M., 2020. Artificial intelligence vision-based
monitoring system for ship berthing. IEEE Access 8, 227014–227023. http://dx.
doi.org/10.1109/ACCESS.2020.3045487.
Lambert, R., Li, J., Wu, L.-F., Mahmoudian, N., 2021. Robust ASV navigation through
ground to water cross-domain deep reinforcement learning. Front. Rob. AI 8,
http://dx.doi.org/10.3389/frobt.2021.739023.
Leite, P.N., Pinto, A.M., 2024. Fusing heterogeneous tri-dimensional information for
reconstructing submerged structures in harsh sub-sea environments. Inf. Fusion 103,
102126. http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.inffus.2023.102126.
Leite, A., Pinto, A., Matos, A., 2018. A safety monitoring model for a faulty mobile
robot. Rob. 7, 32. http://dx.doi.org/10.3390/robotics7030032.
Leite, P., Silva, R., Matos, A., Pinto, A.M., 2019. An hierarchical architecture for docking
autonomous surface vehicles. In: Proc. - 19th IEEE Int. Conf. Auton. Robot Syst.
Compet.. ICARSC, pp. 1–6. http://dx.doi.org/10.1109/ICARSC.2019.8733620.
Li, S., Liu, J., Negenborn, R.R., Wu, Q., 2020. Automatic docking for underactuated
ships based on multi-objective nonlinear model predictive control. IEEE Access 8,
70044–70057. http://dx.doi.org/10.1109/ACCESS.2020.2984812.
Lin, X., McConnell, J., Englot, B., 2023. Robust unmanned surface vehicle navigation
with distributional reinforcement learning. In: Proc. - 2023 IEEE/RSJ Int. Conf.
Intell. Robot. Syst.. IROS, pp. 6185–6191. http://dx.doi.org/10.1109/IROS55552.
2023.10342389.
Liu, H., Peng, Z., Gu, N., Wang, H., Liu, L., Wang, D., 2024. Collision-free auto-
matic berthing of maritime autonomous surface ships via safety-certified active
disturbance rejection control. ISA Trans. http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.isatra.2024.
03.010.
Løver, J., Gjærum, V.B., Lekkas, A.M., 2021. Explainable AI methods on a deep
reinforcement learning agent for automatic docking. IFAC-PapersOnLine 54 (16),
146–152. http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.ifacol.2021.10.086.
Martinsen, A.B., Bitar, G., Lekkas, A.M., Gros, S., 2020. Optimization-based automatic
docking and berthing of ASVs using exteroceptive sensors: Theory and experiments.
IEEE Access 8, 204974–204986. http://dx.doi.org/10.1109/ACCESS.2020.3037171.
Meyer, E., Heiberg, A., Rasheed, A., San, O., 2020a. COLREG-compliant collision
avoidance for unmanned surface vehicle using deep reinforcement learning. IEEE
Access 8, 165344–165364. http://dx.doi.org/10.1109/ACCESS.2020.3022600.
Meyer, E., Robinson, H., Rasheed, A., San, O., 2020b. Taming an autonomous surface
vehicle for path following and collision avoidance using deep reinforcement
learning. IEEE Access 8, 41466–41481. http://dx.doi.org/10.1109/ACCESS.2020.
2976586.
Mnih, V., Badia, A.P., Mirza, M., Graves, A., Lillicrap, T., Harley, T., Silver, D.,
Kavukcuoglu, K., 2016. Asynchronous methods for deep reinforcement learning. In:
Proc. 33rd Int. Conf. Machine Learning. Vol. 48, New York, USA, pp. 1928–1937.
Nguyen, V.S., 2019. Research on a support system for automatic ship navigation in
fairway. Future Internet 11 (2), 38. http://dx.doi.org/10.3390/fi11020038.
Pereira, M.I., Claro, R.M., Leite, P.N., Pinto, A.M., 2021a. Advancing autonomous
surface vehicles: A 3D perception system for the recognition and assessment of
docking-based structures. IEEE Access 9, 53030–53045. http://dx.doi.org/10.1109/
ACCESS.2021.3070694.
Pereira, M.I., Leite, P., Pinto, A., 2021b. A 3-D lightweight convolutional neural network
for detecting docking structures in cluttered environments. Mar. Technol. Soc. J.
55, 88–98. http://dx.doi.org/10.4031/MTSJ.55.4.9.
Pfeiffer, M., Shukla, S., Turchetta, M., Cadena, C., Krause, A., Siegwart, R., Nieto, J.,
2018. Reinforced imitation: Sample efficient deep reinforcement learning for
mapless navigation by leveraging prior demonstrations. IEEE Rob. Autom. Lett.
3 (4), 4423–4430. http://dx.doi.org/10.1109/LRA.2018.2869644.
Pinto, A.M., Marques, J.V.A., Campos, D.F., Abreu, N., Matos, A., Jussi, M.,
Berglund, R., Halme, J., Tikka, P., Formiga, J., Verrecchia, C., Langiano, S.,
Santos, C., Sá, N., Stoker, J.-J., Calderoni, F., Govindaraj, S., But, A., Gale, L.,
Ribas, D., Hurtós, N., Vidal, E., Ridao, P., Chieslak, P., Palomeras, N., Barberis, S.,
Aceto, L., 2021. ATLANTIS - the atlantic testing platform for maritime robotics.
In: OCEANS 2021: San Diego – Porto. pp. 1–5. http://dx.doi.org/10.23919/
OCEANS44145.2021.9706059.
Pinto, A.M., Matos, A.C., 2020. MARESye: A hybrid imaging system for underwater
robotic applications. Inf. Fusion 55, 16–29. http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.inffus.2019.
07.014.
Rees, C., 2021. A Master’s Guide to Berthing. The Standard Club, London, UK.
Rigatos, G., Siano, P., Selisteanu, D., Precup, R.E., 2017. Nonlinear optimal control
of oxygen and carbon dioxide levels in blood. Intell. Ind. Syst. 3 (2), 61–75.
http://dx.doi.org/10.1007/s40903-016-0060-y.
Roman, R.-C., Precup, R.-E., Hedrea, E.-L., Preitl, S., Zamfirache, I.A., Bojan-Dragos, C.-
A., Petriu, E.M., 2022. Iterative feedback tuning algorithm for tower crane systems.
Procedia Comput. Sci. 199, 157–165. http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.procs.2022.01.
020.
Rørvik, E.-L.H., 2020. Automatic Docking of an Autonomous Surface Vessel. (Master’s
thesis). Norwegian University of Science and Technology (NTNU).
Sarda, E.I., Qu, H., Bertaska, I.R., von Ellenrieder, K.D., 2016. Station-keeping control
of an unmanned surface vehicle exposed to current and wind disturbances. Ocean
Eng. 127, 305–324. http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.oceaneng.2016.09.037.
Schulman, J., Levine, S., Moritz, P., Jordan, M.I., Abbeel, P., 2015. Trust region policy
optimization. http://dx.doi.org/10.48550/arXiv.1502.05477, arXiv:1502.05477.
Schulman, J., Wolski, F., Dhariwal, P., Radford, A., Klimov, O., 2017. Proximal pol-
icy optimization algorithms. http://dx.doi.org/10.48550/arXiv.1707.06347, arXiv:
1707.06347.
Silva, R., Leite, P., Campos, D., Pinto, A.M., 2019. Hybrid approach to estimate
a collision-free velocity for autonomous surface vehicles. In: Proc. - 19th IEEE
Int. Conf. Auton. Robot Syst. Compet.. ICARSC, Porto, Portugal, pp. 1–6. http:
//dx.doi.org/10.1109/ICARSC.2019.8733643.
Sutton, R.S., Barto, A.G., 2017. Reinforcement Learning: An Introduction. MIT Press,
Cambridge, MA.
Valdez, F., Castillo, O., Cortes-Antonio, P., Melin, P., Kahraman, C., 2020. A survey of
type-2 fuzzy logic controller design using nature inspired optimization. J. Intell.
Fuzzy Systems 39 (5), 6169–6179. http://dx.doi.org/10.3233/JIFS-189087.
Volden, Ø., Stahl, A., Fossen, T.I., 2022. Vision-based positioning system for auto-
docking of unmanned surface vehicles (USVs). Int. J. Intell. Rob. Appl. 6 (1),
86–103. http://dx.doi.org/10.1007/s41315-021-00193-0.
Volden, Ø., Stahl, A., Fossen, T.I., 2023. Development and experimental validation
of visual-inertial navigation for auto-docking of unmanned surface vehicles. IEEE
Access 11, 45688–45710. http://dx.doi.org/10.1109/ACCESS.2023.3274597.
Wang, X., Deng, Z., Peng, H., Wang, L., Wang, Y., Tao, L., Lu, C., Peng, Z., 2023b.
Autonomous docking trajectory optimization for unmanned surface vehicle: A hier-
archical method. Ocean Eng. 279, 114156. http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.oceaneng.
2023.114156.
Wang, N., Gao, Y., Zhang, X., 2021a. Data-driven performance-prescribed reinforcement
learning control of an unmanned surface vehicle. IEEE Trans. Neural Netw. Learn.
Syst. 32 (12), 5456–5467. http://dx.doi.org/10.1109/TNNLS.2021.3056444.
Wang, N., Gao, Y., Zhao, H., Ahn, C.K., 2021b. Reinforcement learning-based optimal
tracking control of an unknown unmanned surface vehicle. IEEE Trans. Neural
Netw. Learn. Syst. 32 (7), 3034–3045. http://dx.doi.org/10.1109/TNNLS.2020.
3009214.
Wang, P., Liu, R., Tian, X., Zhang, X., Qiao, L., Wang, Y., 2023a. Obstacle avoidance
for environmentally-driven USVs based on deep reinforcement learning in large-
scale uncertain environments. Ocean Eng. 270, 113670. http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/
j.oceaneng.2023.113670.

===== PAGE 20 =====
Engineering Applications of Artificial Intelligence 133 (2024) 108506
20
M.I. Pereira and A.M. Pinto
Wang, X., Wang, Y., Zhou, W., Zhang, J., 2023c. Pursuit-evasion game of unmanded
surface vehicles based on deep reinforcement learning. In: 2023 4th Int. Conf.
Electron. Commun. and Artif. Intell.. ICECAI, pp. 358–363. http://dx.doi.org/10.
1109/ICECAI58670.2023.10176487.
Woo, J., Kim, N., 2020. Collision avoidance for an unmanned surface vehicle using
deep reinforcement learning. Ocean Eng. 199, 107001. http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/
j.oceaneng.2020.107001.
World Meteorological Organization, 1970. The Beaufort Scale of Wind Force : (Techni-
cal and Operational Aspects). WMO, Geneva, URL: https://search.library.wisc.edu/
catalog/999768644902121.
Xia, J., Zhu, X., Liu, Z., Luo, Y., Wu, Z., Wu, Q., 2023. Research on collision avoidance
algorithm of unmanned surface vehicle based on deep reinforcement learning. IEEE
Sens. J. 23 (11), 11262–11273. http://dx.doi.org/10.1109/JSEN.2022.3222575.
Zhang, Q., Pan, W., Reppa, V., 2020. Model-reference reinforcement learning control
of autonomous surface vehicles. In: 2020 59th IEEE Conf. Decis. Control. CDC, pp.
5291–5296. http://dx.doi.org/10.1109/CDC42340.2020.9304347.
Zhang, Q., Pan, W., Reppa, V., 2022. Model-reference reinforcement learning for
collision-free tracking control of autonomous surface vehicles. IEEE Trans. Intell.
Transp. Syst. 23 (7), 8770–8781. http://dx.doi.org/10.1109/TITS.2021.3086033.
Zhang, M., Yu, S.-R., Chung, K.S., Chen, M.-L., Yuan, Z.-M., 2023a. Time-optimal
path planning and tracking based on nonlinear model predictive control and its
application on automatic berthing. Ocean Eng. 286, 115228. http://dx.doi.org/10.
1016/j.oceaneng.2023.115228.
Zhang, T., Zhan, J., Shi, J., Xin, J., Zheng, N., 2023b. Human-like decision-making
of autonomous vehicles in dynamic traffic scenarios. IEEE/CAA J. Autom. Sin. 10
(10), 1905–1917. http://dx.doi.org/10.1109/JAS.2023.123696.
Zhao, Y., Han, F., Han, D., Peng, X., Zhao, W., 2022. Decision-making for the
autonomous navigation of USVs based on deep reinforcement learning under IALA
maritime buoyage system. Ocean Eng. 266, 112557. http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.
oceaneng.2022.112557.